# Is Morality Just Limited to God’s Say-So?

- Publication date: 2026-04-01
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/292eaeaf-5972-35f3-ac4e-4dfa91b01473`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

And welcome to the show, friends. Greg Kokel here, and I'm glad that you're part of what we're doing here today. Thank you. This is called Stand to Reason. I'm your host, and just want to start with some thoughts about morality. You know, it seems like everybody has their area of... I mean, I consider my colleagues and different people on my team and others that we work with on a regular basis, and everybody has their specialty. In fact, next week, we'll have Stephen Meyer on, and he'll be talking about a new documentary that he's involved with. This is going to be so much fun. Stephen is one of the few people I've had that I've done whole two-hour shows with because he's so fascinating and the information he brings is riveting. And we'll be talking about a new documentary called Not a Story of Everything. Is that it? A Story of Everything. And based somewhat on his most recent work, which is the rebirth of the God hypothesis, I think, the title of it. We've had him on for that, but we'll be doing that next week. Anyway, he's really good in that area, and he's really good in a lot of areas. But everybody kind of has kind of their lane, as it were, and I find that's true for me. And I like talking about morality and not sometimes in the abstract, the thing itself, and what we learn from the nature of reality by the fact that morality is part of the nature of reality. Francis Schaeffer, I recall reading when I was a brand-new Christian, first year in the Lord, talking about human beings going through moral motions. In other words, they are involved in what they think is moral activity. Now, that's the kind of the formal category, the material stuff, is the thing of morality that people are talking about all the time. And, in fact, they can't not talk about it because, as Schaeffer has pointed out, they're human beings made in the image of God. And so they are stuck in the world that God made, and they're stuck with the nature that God gave them, and that nature is moral. We know the world is a moral place. It's thick with morality. But, of course, that's something different than the physical elements in the world. That means there's a transcendent element, too, which is why people talk about the problem of evil one way or another, either formally, raising it as a concern with regards to religion, Christianity in particular, or maybe informally when they just complain about the wrong other people do, even though their worldview provides no grounding for such an moral assessment. So when questions come up that deal with that broader issue, morality, I'm interested in them. I want to knock them around a little bit because I think they help us, first of all, understand the nature of the world better and something about the world that morality points to, which is God, and it helps us understand the God of the world a little more accurately as well. So when I think of a question that comes up in the attempt to undermine the grounding of morality by God, the question—because this is the concern— if there is objective right and wrong, what is the grounding for it? What does it stand on? Where does it come from? What accounts for the world being this way? And, of course, you offer the argument that God is the best explanation for that particular detail of reality, morality. People are going to push back with various objections. And one of them is if God were to say that rape is okay, well, then rape wouldn't be okay just because he said it. Rape would still be wrong. And therefore, God cannot be the grounding of morality. Morality can't come from God if it exists apart from God. Now, of course, God hasn't said that rape is okay. And notice this is a speculation. If God were to say, then that wouldn't make rape right. Therefore, God isn't the grounding for it. Well, God didn't say it, and notice it's speculative. So who says that God makes this claim? But there is behind this way of putting it, I think, a substantive concern, and that concern is, is morality just limited to God's say-so? Such that God could say whatever, and therefore whatever would be the case in virtue of his say-so. Now, there is a sense, if God commands it, then it's going to be the right thing to do to follow it, presumably at least, prima facie on the face of it. The question is, is it his power that's making that the right thing to do, or is there something else involved? Now, this question suggests that if God were to say that, he'd be wrong because the questioner knows that rape is wrong, and he knows that how. Well, it's obvious. Well, it might be obvious to you, but I don't know why it would be obvious if there was no God. Because after all, if we are simply natural creatures, merely that, that's the sum total of it, that we are evolved over time by natural selection and mutation, and the strong rule the weak, that seems to be an argument on that view that rape would be good, if good is measured by getting our genes into the next generation most effectively. Why not? Now, it does seem on the face of it, there's something wrong with rape, but that only makes sense if you are accepting something about morality in general, that it's objective, that there are things that are actually wrong in themselves, and also something about human beings because this rule, this forced copulation, doesn't seem to apply to animals. They seem to do it all the time and nobody's troubled by that. So notice that the idea that rape is wrong, even if God says it's not wrong, is based on some things that you're assuming that have worldview ramifications. So what kind of world would it be that rape would be a quantifiable harm, moral harm? It would have to be a world in which human beings are moral creatures and culpable if they misbehave and maybe rewarded when they behave. Okay, that would have to make sense. And human beings would also have to be the kind of being where that kind of sexual activity would be inappropriate because something else about human beings, autonomy, choice, nobility, respect, I don't know, something like that, something that animals don't participate in. And the question I would ask for the person who asks this, I think there's a basic misunderstanding about God's role here, but I'm just following the charge out. What would make rape wrong if you thought that it still would be wrong if God said it was right? It is wrong because of what? Now, you can't say it's obvious. And the reason you can't say that is you'll be answering a question I'm not asking. I'm not asking how do you know it's wrong. To that you could respond, well, it's just obviously wrong. It's really clear. Duh. I'm asking what makes it wrong. That's a different question. That's the grounding question. I could ask you, what, what makes speeding wrong? And you say, look, there's a sign. Can't you see it? 35 miles an hour when children are present. There you go. I say, well, that's not what makes speeding wrong. That's how you know speeding in this place is wrong. And it also tells you what speeding is and under the conditions when it is wrong over 35 miles an hour when students are present. But that doesn't answer the question I'm asking, what makes it wrong? The thing that makes that wrong is a government who put the sign there and has the authority and power to, has the authority to make the rules and the power to enforce them and the propriety of punishing those who disobey because of larger things at issue like the safety of valuable human beings. That's the grounding.

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

Not the sign. If I say what makes rape wrong in the circumstance that you're just saying, you could say, it's obvious. No, that's not the answer to my question. It may be obvious that it's wrong, but what makes it wrong? If you don't have an answer to that, it's going to be very hard for you to be consistently pressed that it's wrong. All you can say is that it feels wrong. It obviously feels wrong, but if there's no legitimate rationale, you can't substantiate that it is wrong. Alright? Okay, so that's the first thing I want you to see there. That this kind of claim that rape is wrong, it only, it is packaged in a whole bunch of other stuff that have to be the case for this statement to make any sense, or else you're just emoting. That's called emotivism, by the way. It's a view of morality that means that moral statements are not even substantive. They're not even meaningful. They're just utterances of pleasure or dissatisfaction or whatever. But you're not saying anything substantive when you say rape is wrong. It's not even a meaningful proposition. It's just an expression of your emotions about the action. And by the way, there's a lot of people who think rape is fine. Okay, so now what? So just identifying something as an objective wrong is not going to be adequate. You're going to have to find a way to make sense of that claim, and you have to find a way to ground it so that your explanation of why it's wrong, what makes it wrong, fits with our normal, ordinary intuitions about that thing, which is that it's an objective thing that pertains to human beings for certain reasons, and that there is culpability, blame associated with, and appropriate punishment associated with doing that wrong thing. But there's another little chunk here, though, that has to do with God. This thing only works if rape is actually wrong independent of God. And that's what I'm asking someone to show, not how they know it, common sense, but what makes it wrong. Now I want to talk about God here because the presumption is, and I hinted at this already, the presumption is that when there are commands that God gives, these are commands that are somehow merely grounded in his power. God says it, therefore I've got to do it. The right and wrong issue, question, only applies, is rooted or grounded simply in his power. If he says it, that's it. But that's not the view that scripture represents regarding morality and God. According to scripture, God, he's not free to make up any moral rules he wants to. And it's not because there is some kind of external standard out there that is governing him, but rather that his character is the standard. God is himself moral perfection. For example, God is love. Is there anyone who thinks that love is a vice? No, we say God is love because it's a virtue and we think God being the most virtuous is going to have a foundation of love that's characteristic of him. Now justice is also a good thing. And the God of the Bible has as an essential quality justice and love. And consequently, this is part of his character, and therefore what he does are going to be informed by his love and his justice. So instead of being informed by some external command, set of rules, it is God's character itself that is the foundation of all morality. By the way, if it wasn't that, what is the option? Oh, there's this other standard, really? And where did that standard come from? Because the standards don't have enforceability all by themselves. An essential element or feature of morality is obligation. And obligation is held between people. I'm not obligated to things. I'm obligated to people who own things, maybe. With regards to a thing, I have obligations to that if someone else owns it. But the obligation is not to the thing, it's to the person who owns it. And it is persons that hold us responsible for the obligations we have towards them. We have obligations in our community, and that's expressed through laws that the government enforces. But there is no just set of laws. It isn't just like, there it is, because who cares? So I'm just going to disobey it. What does authority does this list have? It's the 10 commandments. These are commandments. Someone commands people to do these. They aren't just sitting out there as if sitting out there they are obliged to obey them. And so the morality is grounded in a person. And if it's not a person, if the person, according to this objection, is beholden to an external set of laws, why is that? Where did those laws come from that make them incumbent upon God himself? Now, what I'm saying is the only real answer here to make sense of the moral project is that there is a God who is morally good in himself, and the commands that he gives flow from his goodness. And I honestly don't know what other option there is. I mean, you can go to evolution if you want, but that's not objective morality. That's subjective morality. If it can produce moral convictions inside of people, which I have no reason to think it can, that are then used by nature, if you will, to help us get our genes into the next generation more effectively and, you know, survival of the fittest, however, you know, at best you have relativistic morality. That's it. You can't have objective morality. Darwin, Darwinian processes, evolution, biology cannot make rape wrong. None of them can. But if rape is wrong, then there must be an adequate grounding or any other moral issue, for that matter. There has to be an adequate grounding. What's the adequate grounding? So I'm just not going to accept the challenge as offered. If God was to say that rape is okay, rape would still be wrong. Therefore, morality doesn't come from God. It exists apart from God. It makes no sense to say that moral obligations exist apart from God. Rape isn't...Rape is wrong, but not because God just says it is. It's because he is good, and what he says is going to be good as well. Anyway, just some thoughts on that issue. Let's take a quick break and cover some more ground when I come back. Have you ever wondered how Stand to Reason is able to produce fresh, accessible content each week? We rely on generous donors so that we can provide you with the tools and tactics you need to be an effective ambassador for Christ. If you've benefited from this podcast or any of our donor-provided resources, including our apps, blog posts, articles, and short videos, consider making a financial contribution to Stand to Reason today. Just visit str.org slash donate to show your financial support. It has been an honor providing you with a host of free resources for more than 27 years to help you give voice to the Christian worldview. Help us continue by making a financial gift today at str.org slash donate. Some transgender ideology advocates cite examples from other animal species as evidence that sex is on a spectrum for human beings. Find out why their reasoning is mistaken in the latest episode of my podcast, Thinking Out Loud with Alan Schliemann. Look for it on Spotify, iTunes, your favorite podcast app, or at the top of the homepage at str.org. Would you like a Stand to Reason speaker at your event? Greg, Alan, Tim, Jon, Megan, and I, Tripp, are available in person or online. Just email booking at str.org. Our team speaks on a wide range of topics from issues in bioethics, gender and science, to topics in apologetics, theology, and philosophy, and how to respond to other worldviews, all from a biblical perspective. Whether it's a conference, youth event, or Sunday service, we're here to give confidence for every Christian, clear thinking for every challenge, courage and grace for every encounter. All right, back with you here at Stand to Reason, and let's go to the...

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

Phones, and we have Memphis, Tennessee, and Mike. Hello, Mike. Hey, Greg. How you doing? Very good. Good. It's been a few years since I talked to you. Oh, okay. Glad to have you back, I think. Thank you. We'll see. I am calling about the criteria for the canon of Scripture. Okay. I read F.F. Bruce's book many years ago, and I think I remember at least two of the three criteria, which is it has to be a writing by someone who knew Jesus directly. Is that correct? You are warm, but apostolicity is the criterion there, but you're close. We will refine it in a minute. And the second that you had? The second one was it has to be a writing that has been used by the early church, recognized as Scripture by the early church, and used consistently throughout from the early church to the present. That's catholicity. That could be refined a little bit, but I got you. And then I forget what the third one is. My question really is, is the criteria for the canon contained within Scripture? No. No, nothing. Okay, the idea of canonicity has to do with its rule or authority. That's what that word means, rule or authority. So the question is, what are the books that are the appropriate rule or authority for the church? But of course, no book could have that in there, because what you have, the question will be then, well, that book that says this is the criterion, why should I believe that book if I'm not sure that that book is canonical? Do you see the problem? Oh, yes, a little bit circular. Well, it would be, yeah, I'm not sure technically if it would be circular. It would just, it would be self, it would raise an unsolvable problem, because if we're going to say that the criteria for canonicity, that is the authority of a particular book, is going to be in the book, well, which book is it going to be in? Well, once you choose a book that says, here's the criteria of canonicity, how do we know, how can we apply that internal test to the book itself, which is making the claim? How do we know that that book is a reliable book? So it is very similar to a circularity. It's just unrelated to the process, okay? And I think people are backing into this issue in a completely wrong way. I hear these conversations between, with Roman Catholics and Protestants about this, and they say, well, where does it say the Bible only in the Bible? I say, well, it doesn't say it anywhere in the Bible, the Bible only. Well, then that's circular, because it's not in the Bible and you're saying the Bible only. Well, it's a complete misunderstanding of the view, Sola Scriptura. So let's just talk about canon for a minute, because it is not that hard, and what you offered were some important factors. The third one was orthodoxy, and it really comes, starts with apostolic testimony, orthodoxy, and what's called catholicity, all right? So let me explain each one, but we have to get, kind of zoom in, dial down on the concept of what canon means. So do you know what the word canon means? A received body of knowledge? No, it's not just a received body. The word canon means rule, R-U-L-E, or authority, okay? So what is it that the church counts as authoritative leadership direction, guidance, word from God, as it were, for the early church? What can we trust? What's reliable? Okay, so you start, we're going to leave the Old Testament out for the moment, because this is New Testament canonicity. The early church all accepted the Old Testament, so did the Jews. And so that's not an issue here. But when you have the New Testament time, the first rule, the first authority, what do you want to guess? Where does authority start for the early church? I can't guess. Yeah, you can. It's easy, but you're trying too hard. The words of Jesus. Jesus. It's not the words of Jesus, it's Jesus, okay? So Jesus is the authority. Whatever he says goes. He knows the truth. He's the way, the truth, and the life, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And a whole bunch of what he did was to demonstrate that what he is saying is reliable because he's got the evidence to back it up. Believe me because of what Moses said. Believe me because of what John the Baptist said. Believe me because of the miracles. Believe me, believe me. Here's all the reasons. So Jesus is the authority and the disciples follow Jesus. They were trained by Jesus for three, three and a half years, okay? So Jesus is the canon rule. He is the authority, okay? Then Jesus dies, resurrects, and goes away. Now, who's left to run things? The apostles. The apostles. They're the ones who were taught directly by Jesus. So the apostles are now the rule and the authority. And we learned from what John writes that Jesus made a promise to those apostles in the upper room that the Holy Spirit would guide them unto all truth and bring to remembrance everything he had taught them. So now we have an official declaration by Jesus that that group would be a special group because they were taught and instructed by Jesus, and they would have the Holy Spirit that would bring that recollection back accurately and would also lead them in any new things they needed to teach. And this is very helpful. Yeah, so that you, you're probably familiar with those statements in the upper room discourse in John 14 and John 15 is where they appear, okay? So now we have, who's the rule now? It's the disciples. So whatever the disciples say, they're the ones who are representing Christ. They are taught by Christ, okay? And so you have among them, most famously, Peter, James, John, Peter, James, and John, the inner circle right there. And then you have later James, who was the half-brother of Jesus, who is a witness to the resurrected Christ, and turns out to be one of the leaders of the early church. He presides over the council of the Jerusalem Council in Acts chapter 15. So we see this leadership emerging from this apostolic band that the church listens to. Why? Because they were close to Jesus. They were taught by Jesus. The Holy Spirit's been given to them to help instruct the rest of the church. So that band is, and their teaching, is the canon rule, okay? And they taught and they also wrote. Now we have another person that shows up, Saul of Tarsus. And Saul of Tarsus has a conversion based on an eyewitness with Jesus. And then over time is instructed by Jesus, and we read this in Galatians chapter 1, that he is the one who gets his revelation from Jesus directly, just like the apostles did, but in his, after his earthly ministry, okay? He learns these things by revelation. But then he says in Galatians, he takes what he's learned and he goes and he talks to the so-called pillars, Peter, James, and John in Jerusalem, and he's not sure whether he's run in vain. I just want to make sure that we're both all saying the same thing in terms of these doctrinal teachings. And they all give him the right hand of fellowship. So now Paul is included in that band of brothers, so to speak, that have the authority to speak for God to the church. Okay, now they are the canon. Now, that's why it's not surprising that as time goes on and these people die off, the things that they wrote that are left that they know came from these men were immediately and virtually without question accepted by the larger church as authoritative Scripture. In fact, um, early on, this is especially true with the Pauline work, if Paul wrote it and they knew Paul wrote it, that's over with. No more discussion. This is holy writ. Now there are other books in the full canon. It took them a while to figure this out because they weren't sure exactly who wrote certain things. So early on, Revelation was in and then it was out because it was weird. And then it came back later as being fully embraced. You have 2nd and 3rd John. You have 2nd Peter. You have Hebrews. They didn't know the, so these are the ones that were, they weren't sure in terms of apostolic authority. And then as time went on, they began to embrace these things for a number of different reasons. But the point–

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

What I'm making is apostolic authority was the main deal. It was the main deal. And if there could be— if a piece was written by an apostle or a close associate of an apostle, which would include Luke as the companion of Paul and John Mark as the companion of Peter, then these things were in. And by the way, the Gospels were accepted very, very early by the church. And we can follow this by the lists of the writings that people offer. Now, here's an important— that is certain lists that show up that include these books that everybody was using as Scripture. By the way, there were some things, too, that a lot of people liked, but others weren't sure, like the, like the, um, uh, the D-D-K, or the, um, I'm just thinking, there's a number of other pieces that were used for devotional purposes, that, um, Shepherd of Hermas, that, that didn't rise to the level of canon, though it had usefulness devotionally for the church. Here was the key, though, and this is really important, Mike, the canon is not an authoritative list of books. It is a list of authoritative books. Yep, I heard you say that over the years. Okay, good. I, I got this from Dan Wallace, and I think this is really helpful, because Roman Catholics characteristically will argue that it was the Roman Catholic Church who wrote the Bible, and therefore, New Testament in particular here, and therefore they get to say which books are in the New Testament. I mean, this is, I mean, it's, it's frustratingly common, but it's not accurate, because it isn't as if the Roman Catholic Church, in the way we think of it now, even existed in that way then. And it wasn't like the reason that the books are accepted is because an independent authority, a church, an ecclesiastical group, gave its imprimatur, its approval, to these books, and the authority of the church gave the authority to the books. It was the other way around. It was the books that had the authority in themselves, actually, the minute the pen hit the parchment, those words were authoritative, but they were recognized as authoritative by the rest of the church over time as some of these criteria were satisfied. And the first one was from an apostle or a close associate with the apostle. Here's the second one. The second one was Orthodoxy. That is, those books that they knew were written by apostles set the standard for doctrine of what was to follow. So if Paul set the standard in a clear Pauline book, or John did, for that matter, or Peter did, then that's the standard of orthodoxy, and any new alleged writings that people might think is canonical had to comport with the orthodoxy established in those writings by known apostles. And if it didn't, then it wasn't in. And the third thing was Catholicity. And here I don't mean it like Roman Catholicity. The word Catholic means universal. And it's ironic, Roman Catholic Church means the universal Roman Church. It's a little bit of a contradiction in terms. I guess, to be charitable, it means the universal church that is run from Rome, I guess is the best way of putting that. But this test of Catholicity means that since this is God's Word to the church, the church is going to recognize God's Word, just like the Jews did with their canon. The new covenant believer is going to be able to discern this. And that's why I mentioned it's not an authoritative list of books. It's a list of authoritative books. The authority isn't in the Christians who made the list. They just recognized the list that, or the books that were authoritative by the criteria that I offered. And if there was a split vote on it, like, by the way, with the Apocrypha, if you got a split vote and they had a split vote for 1600 years on that, it's not canon, because it doesn't satisfy that particular test. By the way, the Apocrypha was canonized officially at Trent, and that's what, 16th century. And even at Trent, there wasn't a unanimous vote. It was a two-thirds vote in favor of it, which means one-third of all those that voted at Trent voted against it as canon. In other words, even at Trent, there wasn't unanimity. And if there wasn't unanimity, it doesn't satisfy the criteria of Catholicity, and therefore it's not canon. So there, there's, that's actually the, I'm trying to think of the right word to describe it. That's kind of the history of how it all unfolded, you know, the birthing of the canon and the details of it. I wrote a solid ground about this, I think it was the summer before last, or maybe it was the fall before last, fall of 24 then, that it came out. I was writing it in the summer in Wisconsin. Or maybe, I don't know, I just remember I was in Wisconsin, so it had to be summertime, maybe early fall. But it came out, and it was called Which the Canon, Which Books, and Why, I think is the title. Is that it, Amy? The Canon, Which Books, and Why? Yeah, she's nodding yes. And I go through this entire characterization that I offered, and, and try to lay it out as clearly as possible. The New Testament. Okay, thank you. It's the New Testament canon, Which Books, and Why. Okay, and there I just run through all of those details, just as I've characterized them to you. So we don't have to have this requirement that the books themselves have to have the criterion for canonicity, because we don't find, strictly speaking, we don't find that criterion inside the books. That's not the point. We don't look inside a book to determine who wrote the book, who the real author of the book is. We have to find some other thing. There may be indications, like any given book, we could say, well, this looks like C.S. Lewis is writing. And I think there have been some manuscripts found where the internal evidence seemed to indicate that this is something that he wrote. But the, the criteria of canonicity by its very nature has to come from outside, because it is the process by which or the standards used by the church to determine which books were reliably from God in a sense to instruct the church and to rule the church as the canon or as the standard for the church. And it just followed so naturally when you think of Jesus training the disciples and they wrote letters. Okay, that's it. There's your standard right there. And as long as things fit right in there and, and everybody pretty much agreed that that was the case, then you've got, you've got a canon of Scripture, and that's why it all came together very, very nicely eventually. Took about 400 years for it all to come together. But a whole bunch of it came together very, very quickly because of the apostolic authorship that was obvious for a lot of the pieces. All right. Well, you get a lot to chew on. So thank you. Thank you for your information and for your ministry. All right. You're welcome, Mike. It's good talking to you, buddy. Bye-bye. Bye-bye now. By the way, I made reference to this solid ground that I wrote, and what, what ends up happening every, every year, we have six episodes or episodes, issues, six articles of solid ground, and I usually write them, but sometimes other members of our team write them, and we'll be seeing more of that in the next couple of years, uh, taking some of the burden off of me, and we got a great team. And I've coupled up with a couple of the guys, with Alan and with Tim and with John at different times to, to write these. We co-authored them, and, and, uh, we provide them at no charge for you as a member of our community so that we can strengthen you and build you as an ambassador for Christ. Now, if you are not getting these things, uh, shame on you. All you have to do is go to SDI.org in the upper right-hand corner. It says register. Is that right, Amy? That's the way it works, right? Is that right? I think it, Oh, subscribe. Okay. Yeah. Thank you for that. Subscribe. Close enough. And then subscribe. No charge. We give these things to you because we're trying to build you as ambassadors for Christ. All right. And what you'll get is six issues a year. And, uh, on the odd months, like January, March, May, July, et cetera. And then you will also in the even months, the alternating months, you'll get a one-page mentoring letter, which I usually write, but sometimes other team members do it as well. It's just two sides, you know, 800 words. And it's just to give you more tidbits of things that will help you to be a better ambassador for Christ in the area of knowledge, wisdom, and character, knowledge, an accurately informed mind, wisdom, and artful method, and character and attractive manner. And if you, if you go there, you're going to get, and you register, you'll get, we'll put you on board and we want to send this to you.

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

This stuff to you, this is the reason that we're here. So one other thing I want to mention before I go to break, and that is that in one of the spots there during breaks, I think it's me that's voicing this spot. I'm telling you about STR ask, hashtag STR ask. That's co-led by Amy Hall and me. We're the hosts. Actually, it's her show, and she asks me questions, and then she fills in all the blanks, which oftentimes, there are plenty of blanks for her to fill in, wonderfully, too. So if you like this show, you're going to like that one even more because you get me and you get Amy as well, and that's like, that's a huge plus. That's a force multiplier, all right? Let's go to break, and then we'll come back with more of your questions when I return on Stand to Reason. Stay with us. Do you have a passion to train people in apologetics, but you don't know where to start? You may be interested in starting an STR outpost. STR outposts are local communities of Christians seeking answers to the hard questions about Christianity. Each outpost is led by a qualified director who trains others with STR content and curriculum in their local church. By becoming an outpost director, you'll be equipped with the content and coaching you need to lead your own outpost. We currently have around 160 outposts spanning 38 states and in eight other countries, and we're adding more each month. If you're interested in learning more about starting an outpost or you want to find a current outpost in your area, visit str.org slash outposts. You can also email me, tripalman, at outpost at str.org. Did you know Stand to Reason has a YouTube channel? We release a new video each Monday on the topics you care about. Through short, engaging videos, our speakers train you on tactics, offer apologetics tips, answer common theology questions, and address big issues in the world today. Join tens of thousands of other subscribers so you can stay up to date when we release a new video. Just go to youtube.com and search STR videos, all one word, and hit the subscribe button. That's STR videos. Take advantage of this free resource to help you stay informed, encouraged, and equipped as you share your worldview with others. All right, just a heads up. We have been having trouble with our phones for weeks now, apparently, and we're working on it. And so some of you may have been trying to get in and you haven't been able to get in. Mike got in, and that's great. But we haven't been able to stack callers because of the difficulty. I think that's going to be fixed this next week. But I just thought you guys forgot about me. And it turns out that, yeah, I'll get to that. It turns out that we just had those problems. So what we're going to work on right now is open mic calls. And, of course, this is where you call in off hours. Actually, you don't call us. You go to our website at str.org, and on the homepage where it says podcasts, you look under live broadcasts and there's an opportunity for you to leave a recording with your question. And we have had pages and pages of open mic calls and we're getting low. And that's because we've been doing a lot of shows in advance as I'm anticipating time away this summer, but that means if you have a question that you'd like to ask me, it's a great time to do so, and you don't have to wait on the line. You don't have to talk on the air. Just do an open mic call at str.org under podcasts and live broadcasts. So please send us them. We need more. I'm looking at like four left. What are you pointing at? Open mic, right? The phone number? Okay, that. Okay, sorry. Sign language. Also, if you're listening now, you can call in because our one operating line is not being used right now, 855-243-9975. I thought you were pointing to the open mic thing, so I'm carrying on about open mics. God bless you, Amy. Blessed are the pure at heart. That would be me in this case. I thought the best, but I was wrong. I mean, 855-243-9975. That's the number you call right now if you like to talk to Amy and get in the queue of one person to chat with me for this hour and all of the next one that I'll be recording here today. 855-243-9975. Okay, here is a question from, this is an open mic call, from Sherry. Hi Greg, two questions that are related. First one, if there was no sin in heaven, how is it possible that Satan rebelled because rebellion is sin? And the second part of that is if the Garden of Eden was perfect, how was Satan able to be there in the first place? I think it has something to do with the temple imagery, but can you help explain the answers to these questions? I'll try. I think the question is based on, I think, some misunderstanding. I don't think the answer has anything to do with the temple, personally. Let's start with this. There was no sin in heaven. I think this is a way that we talk about things that sometimes is misleading because we're not as precise as we ought to be. It isn't like heaven is a place in which sin is impossible to exist. Heaven, in the sense you're talking about it, Sherry, is the abode of God and the other angelic creatures that were all in harmony at the beginning when God created them and apparently before he created man in the garden. And all of this harmony and they're all singing in harmony together. There's a passage that refers to this kind of thing. Everything was fine. And the chief of them, the highest angel, was the shining one, Hillel, Lucifer. Now, Lucifer is what he was before he fell. He became Satan or the devil because he had a proud heart and raised himself up against God and entered into a sinful state, just like Adam and Eve entered into a sinful state in disobeying God. Nobody forced anybody into anything. They had the moral freedom to go that way. And it wasn't as if heaven is this location that is so perfectly pure, nothing evil could ever take place there. That's the wrong way to think about it. If you're thinking about the presence of God, well, God is holy, obviously. But then the devil went, and according to Job, and spoke with God and bargained with God about Job's well-being. And people ask, how could the devil, who's sinful, if God can't look upon sin, be in the presence of God? Well, when we say God can't look upon sin, we're using a figure of speech. And what we really mean there is that he can't abide with sin. If sin is committed, there has to be some just reaction regarding it. There's got to be punishment. He can't just shrug it off. That's what we mean by can't look at sin. We're not talking about his eyes beholding. We're using a figurative way of putting it to help people to see that there's a problem with God and sin. And those who are sinful are going to have to answer to God who is going to judge them. And God can't just shrug it off. That's really the point there. Heaven is the abode of God, but it's also the abode of the angels and this immaterial realm. And we think of it kind of like a space. I don't know how to think of it. It's not a physical space, obviously. It's a place, but it's not physical. It's immaterial. And I don't know how that works. And the angels that were inhabiting that place rebelled against God. And they could choose to sin. And so, when we say there was no sin in heaven, if that's not heavily qualified, we're going to be saying something kind of inaccurate. Yeah, there was sin in heaven. There was a rebellion in heaven. And there was nothing about heaven that made such a thing impossible. Now, in the future, in the new heavens and the new earth, in our abode with God, there will be no sin there. But that's the future where God solves the problem of evil and remakes everything so that it is wonderful again and all the sad things will be undone. Is that the way Frodo puts it? Or not Frodo, Samwise. I wrote it down once because it was so good. It will become untrue. There it is. When all the, is it sad things, something like that. Yeah. Such, will become untrue. Yeah, all this will be, in a sense, reversed. And

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

And so there, there will be no sin in heaven. And on my view, it's not because we won't choose it, it's because we won't be able to choose it. We will be, in that sense, like God. We will be fixed in moral perfection. Then we can do whatever we want in heaven, anything we want, just like God can do anything He wants, but He will never want anything bad, and we will not want to do anything bad. And that's why heaven will be perfect. When we see Him, we will be like Him because we will see Him as He is. Okay, so in a certain sense in the future, there will be no sin in heaven. And in the past, yeah, everything was fine until the devil chose to sin. Okay, and that certainly is possible, that he did. And when he chose to sin, this introduced sin into the realm where the angels were placed and where God was in some sense. And I don't even know how to think of that. Because God strikes me as ill-local. He's not in one place. He transcends that. So it's hard to think about some of these things. But nevertheless, I hope that brings a little bit more order to this phrase that there is no sin in heaven. And if the Garden of Eden was perfect, how was Satan able to be there in the first place? Well, again, it depends on what we mean by perfect. The garden was just right. God had made everything the way He wanted. It was the same way His, as I put it in the story of reality, His noble mind intended. Everything was as it was supposed to be. So imagine just making something and what you make is just right. I have a workshop with tools and stuff, and I can make something work. And I know I'm human. I'm fallible, whatever. Nothing I do is going to be perfect. But there is a sense in which I could make it just right in principle, right? I could just say, that's just, that's exactly what I was trying to do. And so it was good. It was just right. Now, that doesn't mean it can't be broken or marred, even though I, as its creator, made it exactly the way I wanted it to be made. That it totally fulfilled its purpose, its teleology, we might say. That it's accomplishing what I intended for it. That's the way it was in the garden. And by the way, I don't even know, the text doesn't use the word perfect to describe it. We might use that word, but keep in mind, when we describe things, sometimes we use language that's not biblical, even though we're trying to capture a biblical concept in some measure, and then we end up straining at the meaning of the word or the phrase because that seems like it causes problems. And that, I think, is the difficulty with saying there was no sin in heaven or that Eden was perfect. Okay? Eden was just the way God intended it to be. It was just right. Perfect? Well, it kind of depends what you mean. Some people think if it was perfect, then how could there be a fall? Well, it wasn't immutable. If perfection in your mind entails the idea of immutability, it will never be able to change. Well, then Eden wasn't perfect. But that doesn't mean anything was wrong with it. There wasn't anything wrong with it. It was just as God's noble mind intended. It was good. Everything that God made was good. So, there is nothing about the goodness of the garden that kept Satan from interfering. And it was nothing about the, in a certain sense, I guess you might say the perfection of the garden, but you want to be careful with that, that interfered with Satan interfering. It was malleable. It was changeable. It was able to be corrupted. And Satan, that was true in the world God made first before the garden incident, and Satan corrupted that world by an act of will, introducing sin and rebellion, which diminished goodness, lessened the goodness that was part of God's creation. Now, it wasn't the way God intended it. Now, it wasn't working the way He intended. So, that happened in the heavenlies with the fall of the devil and the angels that went with him. And then it also happened in the earthly in Eden, which was, as God intended, it was good. That's the verse, I should say, that's the word that is used there. Everything God made was good. It was just the way He intended. It was working just as He purposed it to work. And human beings were in unfallen friendship with Him, walking in the garden, doing the things that they were designed to do so that they can flourish and be happy and be fulfilled and be satisfied. And then something happened. Satan tempted them. And there was nothing about the garden that in its so-called perfection, if that's the word you want to use, that disallowed Satan from having some kind of influence. And he did. And human beings were similar to Satan in the regard that they had a will that could be exercised against God's purposes. And just as when Satan did that in his pride against God, wanting to exalt himself to the highest level, he fell when our first parents disobeyed God, then sin was found in them too, and they fell. And when they fell, everything changed. They broke their relationship with the Father. They broke their relationship with each other. They broke their relationship with the environment. When they fell, they broke the whole world. And a broken world produces broken people and broken circumstances. And that's why we have a problem with evil. We can explain that. But there is nothing about how God set things up originally in either case, the angelic realm or the physical realm, that though good, though just the way He wanted, though perfect in that sense, guaranteed it would never be changed. Nothing like that. That's in the future, not in the past. In the future, that will never happen again. And by the way, that is really good news. All right, friends, that's it for this show. Thank you for being part of it. Greg Kokel here for Stand to Reason. Give them heaven. Bye-bye now. .
