# God the Artist: What You Never Knew About David & Goliath

- Publication date: 2026-06-09
- RSS GUID: `https://crossexamined.org/?p=103665`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Ladies and gentlemen, we talk about stories in the Bible. They're not actually stories, they are historical accounts. And on any list of the top 10 stories or historical accounts in the Bible, you're gonna find the account of David versus Goliath. And what I wanna talk about today is what you may have never heard about the historical account of David versus Goliath. I know you may have gone to a church and you may have seen a pastor go through this well-known story, this well-known account, and say something like, God can slay the giants in your life. That's the moral they take away from the story, the historical account of David and Goliath. Is that really why that account is in the Bible? Is that why that happened? Too often we wanna make everything apply directly to our current lives. And I know pastors and teachers have sort of a pressure on them to come up with something so relevant, but that, I submit to you, is not the lesson. It's not the point of David and Goliath. And there's a whole nother number of intricate events going on that have to do with the big picture of the Bible when David confronts Goliath and what happens there. And for this, I wanna go to Luke chapter 24 for just a second, because Luke records Jesus on the road to Emmaus with his two disciples who don't know who he is. He's risen from the dead already. They don't know who he is. And he says this in Luke chapter 24, verse 27, and beginning with Moses and all the prophets, Jesus explained to them what was said in all the scriptures concerning himself. Now, they figure out who he is eventually, of course, but initially they don't understand. And then when they realize it's him and he's saying, all the scriptures are about me. What were the scriptures in Jesus' day? There was no New Testament, ladies and gentlemen. There was just what we now call the Old Testament. And it says that beginning with Moses and all the prophets, Jesus explained to them that all the scriptures were about himself. Now, how long was the walk between Emmaus and Jerusalem? About two hours it would take or so, maybe two and a half. If I gave you two and a half hours to explain how Jesus is throughout the Old Testament, would you need that much time? Before I started studying this, I wouldn't need that much time. I might have 10 minutes. I know some prophecies, right? Well, there's an entire world in the New Testament, or I should say in the Old Testament, that is called typology. Now, we covered this, I wanna say, six months or so ago in another passage because we were talking about a series that we just completed filming, by the way, called The Bible You Never Knew. This is gonna come out, hopefully, I say this October, as a new online course. And it's centered around this idea of typology. Now, what's typology? Typology is the idea that there are certain characteristics in the lives of Old Testament characters that foreshadow the life of Jesus. And so, when we say that such and such a characteristic is typical of, say, you, what we're saying is this is a characteristic that is common in your life or about you. Well, it turns out that there are many characters in the Old Testament that have characteristics in their life that are typical of Jesus. Of course, Jesus has them in a perfect way and the Old Testament giants have them in an imperfect way, the Old Testament characters. I'm not talking about the giant of Goliath. And when you see these things, you can't unsee them. And we're gonna see that David is a type of Christ, but Goliath is also a type. And so, what we're gonna look at today, we're gonna go back to this familiar account, this familiar story, and we're gonna see something that most people don't see. And I didn't discover this myself. I'm reading other people. I'm not bright enough to figure this out myself, but once you see it, you can't unsee it. Now, before I go any further, let me just give you an overview of typology in the Old Testament. There are people in the Old Testament that have characteristics in their life that foreshadow Jesus. Adam, he's the first man. Jesus is the second Adam. Isaac, he's a sacrificial son. Jesus is a sacrificial son. Joseph. Joseph saves his people. Jesus is a savior. Moses liberates his people. Jesus liberates us from sin. You know, Moses liberates us from slavery, the Hebrews anyway. Jesus liberates us from sin. Joshua is a conqueror. Jesus is a conqueror. In fact, Joshua is a good example of the second coming of Christ, whereas Moses might be the example of the first coming of Christ. Jesus is an example, or Joshua is an example of the second coming of Christ. And they have the same name, by the way. Joshua, Jesus. It's just that Jesus is a different variation of Joshua. And so Joshua is a conqueror. Jesus is a conqueror. Boaz is a redeemer. Jesus is a redeemer. David is a king. Jesus is a king. Jonah rises from the dead, I believe, in the belly of the great fish. Jesus rises from the dead. And we can go on. There are other types in the Old Testament that are pointing to Jesus. But I wanna drill down here on David, and particularly the story of David and Goliath. Now, this story, by the way, is told in 1 Samuel chapter 17. And some people say, oh, this is kind of a fairy tale. This never really happened. Well, let me give you some archaeological evidence that certainly makes what the historical account of David and Goliath is at least plausible. Okay? Just from a plausibility perspective. Forget about the fact for a second that we have evidence the Bible's the word of God. Let's just say, is this just plausible from an historical perspective regardless of whether or not we're reading the Bible? I mean, were there giants? Was there even a possible man by the name of Goliath? Turns out there's archaeological evidence for both. Okay? And here I wanna show you some of this. You see these giant-sized weapons here? Now, these weapons are actually pre-date David and Goliath by almost 2,000, 1,500 to 2,000 years. But these are weapons that have been found in the land of Israel, and they're quite large. In fact, here is Joel Kramer, the great archaeologist who has some great videos over there on the Bible Expedition YouTube channel. I always recommend Joel because he's a great archaeologist and he has the best videos on archaeology. In fact, we're gonna put his video on these weapons in the show notes so you can find it easily. Look at Joel here holding this spearhead, which is 26 inches high. And the average head of a spear is four inches. Here's one that's 26 inches high. And people, when they found these, thought, well, maybe these were just decorative, kind of ceremonial kind of weapons. Well, it turns out they had wear on them, like they were actually being used. Here are some more giant-sized weapons that appear to actually have been used. You couldn't physically, a normal man, certainly a man, a normal-sized man 3,000 years ago, say 1,000 BC, the time of David, wouldn't be able to really handle a spearhead that's 26 inches long. It'd be too heavy, okay? You couldn't throw it very far. But maybe a guy that was nine feet tall and bigger than, say, an NFL lineman and stronger than an NFL lineman could. And so when you have giant-sized weapons and giant-sized tools and things that you see here, it's at least plausible. Not only that, they found giant-sized armor. This armor that you see on the screen here is in a museum in Israel, the Israel Museum. And this was found about 55 miles north of the city of Gath. What is the city of Gath? That's the city from which Goliath is said to have come from. Interestingly enough, this scale armor, some might call it a coat of mail, this same kind of armor was found near the city gate of Gath as well. This picture is not of that armor. It's from armor 55 miles north up near Netanya, modern-day Israel. But the same thing was found where Goliath lived. Not only that,

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

That, ladies and gentlemen, by the way, here's a picture of what scale armor might look like, okay, on someone. You could think of serpentine armor, if you will. But here's where Gath is, as you can see here on the map. We know where Gath is now. We know exactly where the battlefield was, and I'll show you what that is in a minute. But before we do, before we see that, we're actually gonna show you right here a potsherd, a piece of pottery, with the name Goliath on it. This was discovered in what we call now Gath, ancient Gath, and it comes from about the period of Goliath, the ninth to 10th century BC. It has the name Goliath on it. This was discovered in 2005. Now, is this the same Goliath from 1 Samuel chapter 17? We don't know, but this is, it's all lining up. It could be, quite obviously. So when you add this potsherd with the name Goliath on it from the town of Gath and the scale armor from the town of Gath and the archaeology from these other scale armors and the other weapons, this certainly is plausible that there were giants at that time and maybe even a man, well, certainly there was a man named Goliath. Why would he be on this potsherd from 3,000 years ago? Whether it's the Goliath or not, we don't know, all right? Now, let's refresh ourselves and go to 1 Samuel 17 because this, you know, we know the story. Even if you've never read the Bible, you know the story. But you wanna make sure that we catch every detail here because there are details that you just kind of gloss over. And if you gloss over them, you're missing something extremely important that we're gonna point out here that you probably never knew. Again, I'm not smart enough to figure this out myself. I'm reading other people. I didn't see this either. So don't feel bad, but let's just read. Let's go, David and Goliath. This is 1 Samuel 17. Now the Philistines gathered their forces for war and assembled at Soco in Judah. And by the way, all of these places we know, we know where they are. In fact, let me put up a map right now and you can see where this is taking place. We know where the battlefield was. We know where the armies camped themselves. You can see the Israeli army was to the north of the field of battle and the Philistine just to the south. You can see on this map where, let me see if it has it. Yeah, it has Gath out there. If I can see it myself, I'm looking at a very small monitor right now. That's where Goliath was from. And it shows you what happened after the battle, how the Israelites drove the Philistines after the victory several miles into what is Philistine territory. So these places are known. And they pitched camp at Ephes Damminim, I'm probably pronouncing these wrong, between Soco and Ezekiah. Ezekiah. Saul and the Israelites assembled and camped in the Valley of Elah and drew up their battle line to meet the Philistines. The Philistines occupied one hill and the Israelites another with the valley in between them. All right, let me show you this video here. And this is Dr. Todd Fink over at HolylandSite.com has this great video. This is aerial footage of the area. You can see the Israeli camp. That's where the Israelis were. That's to the north. And then there's the battlefield and the Philistine camp is on the other side. Here's another angle of it from the north. I've been to this site at least three times. This is kind of a Google Earth view of the site there in southwestern Israel. There's the Israeli camp, David's Path. We'll get another look at that here in a minute. There's the Philistine camp. And where the two armies met is right between them. Okay, this is looking north. There's the path that David came down or probably came down, one of those paths there. And there's the stream and the battle area. The stream, it's now dry. You can see this woman here. She's looking at some rocks here. That's probably where David picked up the rocks and headed out to the battlefield right there and went right into the battlefield and launched, launched it right into Goliath's head. So we know where this is, ladies and gentlemen. And there's no reason to doubt any of this in terms of the geography. It's just like the Bible says. It's amazing. All right, let's go back to the account now. 1 Samuel chapter 17 verse 4 says this, a champion named Goliath who was from Gath came out from the Philistine camp. His height was six cubits and a span. Now a cubit was about 18 inches. It's kind of from your elbow to the average person's elbow to the top of the fingers. It's about 18 inches. When you add that up, this guy's over nine feet tall. All right, he's over nine feet tall. He had a bronze helmet on his head and wore a coat of scale armor of bronze weighing 5,000 shekels. Ladies and gentlemen, that's 125 pounds. 125 pounds of scale armor of bronze. And he had this on his legs. He wore bronze graves and a bronze javelin was slung on his back. His spear shaft was like a weaver's rod and its iron point weighed 600 shekels. That's 15 pounds. His shield bearer went ahead of him. That's one translation. Let me read this other translation. 5,000 shekels on his legs. He wore bronze graves and a bronze javelin was slung on his back. His spear shaft was like a weaver's rod and its iron point weighed 600 shekels, which was 15 pounds. And his shield bearer went ahead of him. So Goliath stood and shouted at the ranks of Israel. So he's taunting Israel now. Goliath stood and shouted to the ranks of Israel, why do you come out and line up for battle? Am I not a Philistine and are you not the servants of Saul? Choose a man and have him come down to me. If he is able to fight and kill me, we will become your subjects. But if I overcome and kill him, you will become our subjects and serve us. I mean, this is the way they did things back then. Instead of having a whole bunch of men collide, sometimes they'd just say, bring out your best guy. We'll bring out our best guy. And whoever wins, wins. And then the other side will surrender. Then the Philistine said, this day I defy the ranks of Israel. Give me a man and let us fight each other. On hearing the Philistine's words, Saul and all the Israelites were dismayed and terrified. Now David was the son of an Ephrathite named Jesse, who was from Bethlehem in Judah. Jesse had eight sons and in Saul's time, he was old and well advanced in years. All right, verse 16, for 40 days, the Philistine came forward every morning and evening and took his stand. Now jump down here because there's David arriving at the camp. It explains all that. And down here in verse 23, as David was talking to the men there, Goliath, the Philistine champion from Gath stepped out from his lines and shouted his usual defiance. And David heard it. When the Israelites saw the man, they all ran from him in great fear. Now the Israelites had been saying, do you see how this man keeps coming out? He keeps coming out to defy Israel. The king will give great wealth to the man who kills him. He will also give him his daughter in marriage and will exempt his father's family from taxes in Israel. Hey, this is a pretty good deal if we could take this guy down. We're going to have it made. So David asked the men standing near him, what will be done for the man who kills the Philistine and removes this disgrace from Israel? Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, Philistine that he should defy the armies of the living God? Now David's just a kid, you know, he's a teenager. He's just, man, this uncircumcised Philistine. How is he going to defy the living God? And they repeated to David what they'd been saying and told him, this is what will be done for the man who kills him. All right, so David wants to go fight this guy. And of course, Saul's saying, look, you are just, you're just a kid. You can't take him on. And he tries to put his armor on him. And that doesn't work. In fact, at one point here at verse 34, David said to Saul, your servant has been keeping his father's

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

When a lion or a bear came and carried off a sheep from the flock, I went after it. I struck it and rescued the sheep from its mouth. When it turned on me, I seized it by a tear, struck and killed it. Your servant has killed both lion and the bear. This uncircumcised Philistine will be like one of them because he has defied the armies of the living God. The Lord who delivered me from the paw of the lion and the paw of the bear will deliver me from the hand of this Philistine. Don't you love that kind of courage and that kind of faith? We need more of that. And so Saul said to David, go, may the Lord be with you. And then he tried to put the armor on. The armor didn't work, so he took it. He said, I can't go in these. Verse 39 or so, I just can't go in these because I'm not used to them. So he took them off. Then he took his staff in his hand. He chose five smooth stones from the stream. By the way, I've been in that stream a couple of times. It's still there. It's a dry stream, but the rocks are still there. You saw in the video, we know where all this took place. So he gets these smooth stones from the stream. And it says he put them in his pouch, a pouch of his shepherd's bag. And with a sling in his hand, he approached the Philistine. Meanwhile, the Philistine with his shield bearer in front of him, kept coming closer to David. He looked David over and saw that he was only a boy, ruddy and handsome. And he despised him. Goliath said to David, am I a dog that you come at me with sticks? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. Come here, he said, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the air and the beasts of the field. David said to the Philistine, you come against me with sword and spear and javelin, but I come not come against you in the name of the Lord almighty, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have defied. This day, the Lord will hand you over to me and I'll strike you down and cut off your head. Today, I will give the carcasses of the Philistine army to the birds of the air and to the beasts of the earth. And the whole world will know that there is a God in Israel. All those gathered will know that it is not by sword or spear that the Lord saves for the battle is the Lord's and he will give all of you into our hands. As the Philistine moved closer to attack him, David quickly ran toward the battle line to meet him, reaching into his bag and taking out a stone, he slung it and struck the Philistine on the forehead. The stone sank into his forehead and he fell face down on the ground. So David triumphed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone. Without a sword in his hand, he struck down the Philistine and killed him. David ran and stood over him. He took a hold of the Philistine sword and drew it from the scabbard. After he killed him, he cut off his head with the sword. When the Philistines saw their hero was dead, they turned and ran. Then the men of Israel and Judah surged forward with a shout and pursued the Philistines to the entrance of Gath and to the gates of Ekron. We know where those are. They're on the map. We've excavated Gath. Their dead were strewn along the Seraim road to Gath and Ekron. When the Israelites turned from chasing the Philistines, they plundered their camp. David took the Philistine's head and brought it to Jerusalem. And he put the Philistine's weapons in his own tent. All right. He brought his head to Jerusalem? Jerusalem? Jerusalem wasn't even the capital at the time. In fact, for the first eight years of David's reign, which would start about 10 years after this event, his capital was Hebron. It wasn't. Why is he bringing the head to Jerusalem? We'll get there. All right, now, let's further unpack this. What just happened that maybe we didn't notice? Well, let's go back to the scale armor, the serpentine armor. Serpentine, serpent. What does that make you think of? What does it make you think of? Yeah, it makes you think of Satan, the serpent in the garden. Do you know what the very first prophecy in the Bible is? It's Genesis 3.15. It's right after the fall. And here's what it says. God is speaking, and he says this to Adam and Eve. He says, and I will put hostility between you, he's saying it to Satan too. He's actually saying it to Satan. And I will put hostility between you, Satan, and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He, meaning the offspring of Eve, will strike your head, Satan's head, and you will strike his heel. First prophecy in the Bible. After the fall, God is saying that there's going to be an offspring of Eve that at one point is going to strike your head, crush your head, essentially end you, kill you, although you will strike the heel of this offspring of Eve. That was the first prophecy in the entire Bible. So when we talk about typology, most of the time we're talking about a type of Jesus. As we mentioned earlier, whether it's Adam, whether it's Isaac, whether it's Moses, whether it's Joseph, whether it's David himself, but do you know who Goliath is? Goliath is a type of Satan. Notice the characteristics of Goliath. First of all, he's like superhuman, right? He's stronger than everybody else. Satan's stronger than all of us. He wears scale armor. This is serpent-like. Also, what does he do for 40 days? He taunts and he tempts the Israelites. What does that remind you of? Who is Satan taunting in the wilderness? Well, you might say first, for 40 years, the Israelites in the wilderness, but later he's taunting Jesus. He's tempting Jesus in the wilderness. And of course, Jesus answers by quoting Scripture properly. Satan always uses Scripture, but he misquotes it. That was the first lie. Has God really said? And later he is tempting Jesus for 40 days. So here's this Satan figure tempting the Israelites for 40 days. He's an accuser of the brethren. In fact, Jesus and the apostles call Satan a murderer, liar, accuser, and slanderer who seeks to steal, kill, and destroy. Notice Goliath is an accuser. He's accusing God's people. No extra charge for this. This is what's going on in our modern day as well. We saw a murder of my friend Charlie Kirk on 9-10. What did we have after that? Lies, accusations, and slanders seeking to steal, kill, and destroy. And people don't believe in the demonic. It couldn't be more obvious. It's happening right now. It was happening on this battlefield between David and Goliath. Also, Goliath is an archenemy of God's people. He's eventually defeated by a Judean shepherd. David defeats him here. David's ancestor, sorry, David's offspring, ultimate offspring in human form, is Jesus, who defeats him as well. And he does so without traditional weapons. He's not using a javelin, David. He's not using a sword. He takes the sword of Goliath after Goliath's already dead to cut his head off, but he kills him with a rock, without traditional weapons. Jesus doesn't even have any weapons, and he defeats Satan. They're both Eve's descendants, David and Jesus, and they both strike the head of the Satan figure. In David's case, it's Goliath. Notice Goliath is struck down, face down. He's eating dust, just like the serpent. Just like God says to the serpent, you're gonna eat dust. He falls to the earth. Jesus at one point said, I saw Satan fall from heaven. He falls to the earth. Goliath falls to the earth.

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

Satan falls to the earth. Also notice that Goliath uses Satan or uses Garden of Eden language, the beasts of the field, the birds of the air, talks about earth and flesh. He's using that Garden of Eden language. And by the way, David gives it right back to him, doesn't he? No, no, no, no, no, no. The beasts of the field, the birds are going to eat the flesh of the Philistines. That's what's going to happen here, Goliath. And we've talked about on this program before, I don't have time to get into it in detail here, but there are many chiasms in the scriptures. A chiasm is a way of highlighting a middle point in a story. And the story builds in sequential order to a middle point. Think of the greater than sign. And then it recedes from that middle point in a mirror-like fashion. And if you read the account I just read a few minutes ago from 1 Samuel 17, the account of David and Goliath, you'll see that Goliath starts talking about the beasts of the field and all this. And then David talks about it as well, but he's talking about it in reverse order. It's a chiasm. We can't show it to you right here. I don't have time to get into it. But not only are these intricate details showing you what I think an inspired hand, God, the Holy Spirit, is inspiring all this, but there are also literary devices embedded in here that a casual reading, you don't see. It's just, it's an amazing tapestry. So Goliath is a type of Satan. David's the type of Jesus. Goliath's the type of Satan. Also, if you look at Goliath and snakes in general, by the way, snakes in the Bible are enemies of God. So Satan is depicted as a snake or a serpent in Genesis. Egypt, what is the, what was the sort of the mascot of Egypt? In fact, it's on King Tut's sarcophagus. The cobra, right? Do you remember the showdown that Moses has with the magicians of Egypt? And he takes a staff and turns it into a snake and they have the same trick. They do it as well. But what happens in the showdown? The snake of Moses eats the snake of Egypt. It's basically saying my God can beat up your God, right? Egyptian, the Egyptian symbol of, of their nation is eaten by Moses's snake. So Egypt is considered a snake, but the, the Israel, the Hebrew version of the snake beats the Egyptian version of the snake. Pharaoh is actually called the snake in Ezekiel 32 verse 2. Also notice that serpents kill Israelites in the desert. And you remember that? And then they, they have to look up at what Moses is holding up. And this foreshadows, of course, Jesus being lifted up on a cross. That's how they're saved. If you look up, you'll be saved. So serpents are killing Israelites as they're wandering in the desert. Goliath, of course, is depicted in serpentine armor. He's an enemy of God. The king of Babylon in Jeremiah 51 verse 34 is depicted as a serpent or a snake. And who else is during Jesus's time? Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites, you brood of vipers. I don't think that's coincidental. They're vipers. They're representing Satan. They're not representing God's viewpoint. They're representing their own. They're representing Satan's viewpoint. Also notice that Paul, on his journey to stand trial under Caesar, is shipwrecked in Malta. And when he, when he is warming himself by the fire, a viper attaches to his hand and he shakes it off in the fire. And everybody thought, they looked at him and they said, uh-oh, you must be cursed. You're, you're about to die. And after Paul showed no ill effects, they figured maybe Paul's a God, right? Because when a viper, you know, hits your hand, you should die. Nothing happened to him. And he shakes it off into the fire. What does that remind you of? Where's Satan going to wind up? In the lake of fire. I don't think these things are just coincidental. You see, this is, these are little details that you might not see on a casual reading. But after you see them, you can't unsee them. And then Satan in Revelation is a serpent or a snake. In fact, let's read the passage in Revelation. This is Revelation 12. The ancient serpent Satan will be cast down to earth. Here's what Revelation 12 verses 7 to 9 says. Then war broke out in heaven. Michael and the angels fought against the dragon and the dragon and his angels fought back. But he was not strong enough and they lost their place in heaven. The great dragon was hurled down. That ancient serpent called the devil or Satan who leads the whole world astray. He was hurled down to earth and his angels with him. Goliath was hauled down to earth. He was struck down to earth and he went face down, face plant. Wow. I didn't see all this stuff on a casual reading, did you? Also then, why cut off his head and take it to Jerusalem? Hold on. We're going to get there. I just got to mention that this coming weekend, I'm going to be at Preston, Lord willing, Prestonwood Baptist Church in Dallas, Texas with my friend Jack Graham doing both of the morning services there at Prestonwood. Then let's see, the 17th, Central Church of God here in Charlotte, North Carolina. I'll be there for the Wednesday night service. That's at 7 p.m., I believe. Details are on our website. Then I'll be at the School of Ministries event in Charleston. That's the School of Ministries national conference. Charleston. That's the 19th of June. So that's what's coming up. And by the way, we are almost full at the Cross-Examined Instructor Academy, CIA. If you want to get better at presenting the evidence for Christianity and answering questions and interact over three full days with people like Greg Kokel and Natasha Crane and Elisa Childers and Alan Parr and Richard Howe and Hilary Morgan-Ferrer and John Ferrer and myself, Bobby Conway, and others, you need to apply to the Cross-Examined Instructor Academy. Go to CIA or go to cross-examined.org. Look at events. You'll see CIA there, but apply soon. We are almost full. We're down to just a final few seats. So check all that out. Okay, let's go back to this amazing story called David and Goliath. It's not just a story. It's an historical account. It says in the text that Goliath cut off... I'm sorry, David cut off Goliath's head and took it to Jerusalem. Now, now, why would you take his head to Jerusalem? Why does that make any sense at all? As I mentioned earlier, Jerusalem is not even a city that Israel has control over at this point. Saul doesn't have control over it. He's the king at the time. Why would you take it to Jerusalem? In fact, David, eight years after he takes the throne, and this is all described in 2 Samuel chapter 5, I believe, he has to take the city from the Jebusites in order to occupy it. Why does he take the head of Goliath to Jerusalem? Go back to the first prophecy. We read it earlier. And I will put hostility between you, Satan, and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring, and he will strike your head. He is David here, but the ultimate destruction is Jesus, that Jesus ultimately strikes the head of Satan by destroying his plans and ensuring that he winds up in the lake of fire. In fact, this is what is talked about in several places in the Bible, but let me just back up for a second and point out that if you want to sum up the Bible,

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

In just three short sentences, it's God created it, God created it, we broke it, Jesus fixed it. God created it, we broke it, Jesus fixed it. How does Jesus fix it? He goes to the cross and he allows the creatures that rebelled against him to torture and kill him, so he, after living a perfect life in our place, could take our punishment upon himself, and then when you trust in him, you're not only forgiven, but given his righteousness. He fixed our sin problem. Since we're all sinners and God is infinitely just, he can't allow us to go unpunished, so he has to punish an innocent substitute in our place, or he has to punish us. So instead of punishing us, he punishes an innocent substitute in our place. For those of you out there that want him to take your punishment from you, if you don't want it, you don't have to. In the afterlife, you've got two options. You'll either get justice or you'll get grace. If you take the Jesus route, you'll get grace. If you take the justice route, you're going to have to pay for your own sins. So how does Jesus accomplish this? He accomplishes it by defeating Satan when Satan thought the defeat was killing Jesus, in reality, killing Jesus was the downfall of Satan and the victory of the believer, the victory of God in the fact that God takes our punishment upon himself. And so David brings the head to Jerusalem because through the Holy Spirit, he knows that a thousand years later, his descendant in human form, Jesus, would strike the ultimate blow to the head of Satan. In fact, there's a great passage in Colossians chapter 2. This is a great passage. Verses 14 to 16, it says, Jesus canceled the record of the charges against us and took it away by nailing it to the cross. In this way, he disarmed the spiritual rulers and authorities. He shamed them publicly by his victory over them on the cross. Now, they didn't get this. They didn't know this until it already happened. David was given insight prior to this, a thousand years before this, and the Holy Spirit prompted him to take Goliath's head to Jerusalem where a thousand years later, Jesus would accomplish this. And the reason the powers of this world, Satan and the authorities did not know about this is because God kept it veiled. In fact, here's what 1 Corinthians chapter 2, verses 7 to 8 says. You know how you hear people saying things like, well, you know, the Old Testament prophecy says some of them are fairly specific. I know Isaiah 53 and maybe Daniel 9 and a few others, but many of them are vague. Yeah, they are for a reason. Here's what 1 Corinthians chapter 2 says. We declare God's wisdom, a mystery that has been hidden and that God destined for our glory before time began. None of the rulers of this age understood it for if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Did you get that last part? None of the rulers of this age, Satan, none of the rulers, the rulers of Rome, of Jerusalem, the Jews, none of them understood it because if they had, they never would have crucified the Lord of glory because that was their downfall. So God had enough specificity in the Old Testament so people would know, I know there's a Messiah coming, but he didn't make it so specific that Satan would know, oh, I know the plan now. He had to keep it hidden as this passage says. In fact, we put it this way. We put it in the book, I don't have enough faith to be an atheist, that the New Testament, the events of the New Testament are the box top to the puzzle of prophecy in the Old Testament. Once you get the box top to the puzzle, you start going, oh, now I see how Micah 5:2 and Malachi 3 and Daniel 9 and Isaiah 53 and Isaiah 9 and Jeremiah 23 and all these passages all fit together now to say the Messiah is Jesus. You couldn't put it all together without the box top, just like you can't put this complicated jigsaw puzzle together without the box top. But David knew. David had to know something to take the head without explanation, by the way. It doesn't explain why he took Goliath's head to Jerusalem, but he did. So just as David is a type of Jesus, Goliath is a type of Satan. And David's victory over Goliath foreshadows Jesus' victory over Satan. And there's so many more stories like this, friends. This is throughout the Old Testament. And that's what this series we've done called The Bible You Never Knew goes through. And let me sum it up all this way. You know, a lot of times we spend time on this program and in our books and other apologists talk about evidence for Christianity. We talk about evidence for the Bible. We talk about evidence for God. We talk about evidence for the Bible. We talk about evidence for the resurrection. You know, we have all this, these lines of argumentation to show, yeah, Christianity really is true. The Bible really is true. It really is the word of God. But sometimes we overlook what might be the greatest of all apologetics, and that's the Bible itself. Because I think this is true. When you look at the existence and the nature of the Bible, remember the Bible is not one book, it's a library of books. It's a book we put under one binding, but it's really 66 different writings written over 1,500 years by 40 different authors on three different continents in at least three different languages. And when you pull it all together, you get all of these interacting stories that point to one man who turned out to be the God-man, Jesus of Nazareth. So let me put it this way. The existence and nature of the Bible reveals that God was acting in history through people and through events that are so predictive of Jesus that they cannot be explained humanly. And by the way, God is always at work whether you notice his effects or not. The last session we did on The Bible You Never Knew, you may be able to see it still on YouTube. We take them down after a couple of weeks because they're going to be part of a course. We talked about the book of Esther where God isn't even mentioned in the book of Esther, but we point out that God is at work whether you notice his effects or not. I read the Bible for years. I didn't notice many of these effects until recently. And you'd expect that, by the way, if this is the word of God. But look, there's at least three different levels of interpretation or understanding, maybe is a better word, that a kid can understand the basics of the Bible. That's one level. An intelligent adult can understand another level. But then there's a third level, sort of the scholarly level, the people that really study, they study the original languages. They get into all this. They see all this typology. They see chiasms. They see all these strands that come together as a tapestry and they go, wow. God doesn't write technical manuals. God is an artist. Here's another way of seeing how God is an artist. You see this slide here? Chris Harrison and another gentleman in 2007 looked at how many different scriptures connect with other scriptures in terms of names and events and themes. They found over 63,000 connections. That's what these connections in this rainbow picture, this rainbow image are showing you, the 63,000 connections. Remember, between books that weren't written by the same people, right? There's 40 different authors over 1,500 years, and yet you see all these interconnections. You see the tapestry. You see that the themes and the events and the people fit together across books that were written by different people at different times in different languages on different continents. God's an artist. You know, so many, I'm kind of a left-brain person. I want everything to be just spelled out. Just tell me what I need to know. No, God does some of that. You know, you read some of the Old Testament in Chronicles. Okay, all that's laid out. But God is an artist. He's not just telling you information. He's doing it via story. He's like a playwright.

### 00:50:00 - 00:51:59

And He doesn't always reveal His hand. You got to pay attention to see what's going on. You got to see the connections, and that makes it all the more interesting when you start to see these connections. You go, I never saw that before. Yeah. God's an artist, and His effects are art. The Bible is one of His effects through men that He inspired over 1,500 years. So the Bible is one of the greatest apologetics if you properly understand it, and you study it, and you see these things, you go, yeah, this isn't just the product of men. There had to be a divine hand behind all this. So when you look at the Bible, don't dismiss it. There's a lot more going on than you can imagine. In fact, that's how we know God exists. We know God by His effects. We see a creation, that's an effect. There must be a creator, that's the cause. You see design, that's the effect. There must be a designer, that's the cause. You see a moral law written on our heart, that's the effect. There must be a moral lawgiver, that's the cause. You see a man rise from the dead, that's the effect. There must be somebody who has power over life that can raise people from the dead. That's the cause. You see a series of documents that come together over 1,500 years by 40 different authors on three different continents in three different languages, and they have this intricate tapestry that runs throughout all of the books. Yeah, that's the effect. What must the cause be like? All right, folks, we'll see you here next time, Lord willing. God bless.
