# Has God Always Been Father, Son, and Holy Spirit?

- Publication date: 2026-04-29
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/91d77c8d-8843-3845-b56d-5f78349f3f27`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

All right, friends, Greg Kokel here, Stand to Reason, and I just had two wonderful hours with Amy talking about anti-Semitism, and I hope it was enlightening to you. This is... Amy just reminded me that this is coming way, way, way later, so giving an announcement about reality is not going to be useful. Okay, never mind. Well, we have 1,549 people signed up for something called reality, but now that's probably three months behind us, so... All right, so this is what happens. Now you're seeing the behind the scenes and the, like, making sausage, right? You know, sausage is great until you watch how they make it, then you don't want to eat that stuff. Yeah, well, now you know. All right, so what I'm going to be doing today is taking some open mic calls, and that means people call in to leave their questions on our website. They go to str.org, that's our homepage, and then the drop-down menu says podcasts. You find live broadcasts, and there'll be an opportunity for you to leave your question, which means then you don't have to actually call in during the live show between four and six and wait in the line and hope you get in or whatever. 855-243-9975, just for the record, you can't call now because I'm not here. You can? Oh, okay. Okay, well, more sausage then. Okay, so yes, we can get calls at the moment if you're listening to live streaming, but the show will actually be released, you know, sometime in 2070, whatever. See, I can't even get my years right. I want to start with the 20th century in the 1900s. Anyway, okay, so that number is 855-243-9975 if you want to call in, you're welcome to. And if not this moment, then in the future during a regular live show, Tuesdays from 4 until 6. Did I get that right, Amy? I did. Okay, she's giving me a thumbs up. So let's just jump in and let's... We'll start from the top. I got Joel here, a question about the Trinity. All right? Hi, Greg. This is Joel. Hi, Joel. I have a bit of an odd question. I've been thinking about this for a while and it's been hard to get all my thoughts together, but I wrote them down, so I'm going to read this. Sorry if it sounds a little scripted, but this way it'll make the most sense, I think. Yeah, I do that too. So here it is. Has the Trinity always consisted of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit before the creation of the universe, before anything was created? Could God, as being made of three distinct persons, have consisted of or taken on different roles or entities? Was Jesus, the God-man, always intended to come down in the same form as the created, which were made in his image? As confusing as the Trinity can be, it seems to relate to human design. That is, a creator or Father, mankind as human beings or Jesus, and us having souls or the Holy Spirit. Is that because we have anthropomorphized the concept, or does it necessarily follow that if God was to create anything, it would have to include beings made in his image? So that's a concept I'd like to hear your opinion on. Sorry if it was a lot going on there, but that's what I would love for you to answer. Thanks. All right, Joel. Yeah, there's some odd things here. I agree with you, and I'm looking at all the questions that were offered, and I'm thinking, yes, yes, and no, and yes. So let me start at the top. But a qualifier first. You said, maybe we just made this up, is the way I take how you ended. There was ambiguities or oddities about the Trinity. Maybe we just made this up. We just anthropomorphize God because we have a human nature and we have a soul, and maybe we've made God to be a spirit and a soul, Holy Spirit, and I mean blah, blah, blah. I don't mean that disparagingly. I'm just saying, you said that. I get it. First of all, no one would make up the Trinity. In fact, I wrote a piece once, and I can't remember what I titled it. It might be on the website. But the piece basically said no one would make up this God. People think we create a God in our image. Well, I think a lot of people do, but that's not the Christian God. When you look at the Christian God, you see all kinds of things that are not consistent with the way we would craft a God by according to our own sensibilities. I mean, the last is first, the first is last. He's holy, demands righteous living. Nobody could live that way. We're condemned for not living a perfect life. There are all kinds of things that in some ways would be counterintuitive. Actually, I think it's counterintuitive to the idea that we invented God. We'd make a God much easier to live with, much more like ourselves. This God is not like us at all, especially when it comes to the Trinity. And by the way, the Trinity is not just something kind of lifted or just kind of constructed out of whole cloth. When we look at the Scripture and God's own self-revelation, we see some things that are in conflict with each other unless a very particular and peculiar understanding of God is adopted. We see the Scripture teaching that there is only one God. Then we see Scriptures that indicate that the Father and the Son and the Spirit are not exactly the same. They are separate, well, I'll use the language, persons. But each is called God and has attributes of God and exercises divine prerogatives. And so, unless you've got the Trinity, you've got massive confusion. But the Trinity holds all of these together. So you've got one God with three centers of consciousness, and each center of consciousness is not the other, but they each are coterminous on the divine nature. They share equally all aspects of the divine nature. So we have the doctrine of the Trinity in virtue of what Scripture teaches about God, and the Trinity is the only way to reconcile all of the revelation pertaining to God and the distinctive persons. And that's why my own teaching on this is the Trinity is a solution, not a problem. And if you hold to biblical truth and you deny the Trinity, then you have worked yourself into a corner that you cannot get out of because there are passages you cannot make sense out of unless you have one God, three persons. All right? So just a note that I don't think human beings invented this. It's not the kind of thing we'd invent. It is a result of trying to make sense of the full counsel of God from the Scripture. And the question then was, which is actually the first part of your question, Joel, has it always consisted of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? And was Jesus always intended to come in the same form of those created in his image? And does it necessarily follow that if God were to create anything, he would have to include beings made in his image? The last is not true. It doesn't follow that God had to create beings made in his image. He didn't have to have to do anything. He didn't have to create. If he created, he didn't have to create conscious beings. If he created conscious beings, he didn't have to create beings in his image. He chose to do that. That's God's free exercise of his will to do what he wants. Now, he had purposes in that. I think he wanted to share his happiness. I developed this idea a little bit in the story of reality. He wanted to share his happiness. And so he created the kind of creatures that could participate in his happiness, which has to do with goodness. That is, if they weren't moral creatures, they couldn't experience the happiness of virtue, of goodness, as God experiences it, being the morally.

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

Perfect being. And so in order to share in his happiness, he created beings like that. And so it's not out of necessity, but an overflow of his love that he did that. However, when it comes to God's nature, there's nothing accidental about it. It isn't like, well, maybe Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, but it could have been otherwise. That's kind of like asking you, I know you're a human being, but could you have been a cat? And the answer is no, you couldn't have been a cat because you are a human and a cat is not. A cat is a cat. It's a different nature. It doesn't make any sense to say that, well, you could have been born a cat, because it wouldn't have been you then, because the you that you're talking about is a human. And cats are cats. You don't put a human self in a cat body. That's neither human nor cat. So in the same sense, we are according to our nature, and we could not have been anything else than what we are in our nature. Of course, God didn't have to make us in our nature. He could have made other things in their nature, like the cat, but that wouldn't have been you. And by the same token, it's just a parallel I'm offering as an illustration, the nature of God has been what it is what it's been forever and ever. Because God had no beginning. He had no end. And he is who he is. I am that I am. And it isn't like, well, God's sitting around thinking, maybe I should be a Trinity. Let's try that one out. I'm going to make like son and spirit, and we'll just do that. No, this is God's nature. So the Trinity always, I should say, the nature of God always consisted of the three personages, the Father, Son, and the Spirit. And as far as Jesus always intended to come in the same form as those created in his image, yes, this pertains to the plan of God. God didn't have to save anybody. It could have been different, at least on my view, but he did. He acted so as to save, and the plan that God had from before the foundations of the world, and I think you cited that passage, was as a kinship redeemer to take on humanity to save human beings. And that was God's plan. Even to say it from the beginning doesn't capture it, because it was before the beginning. It was always the case. And part of this has to do with God's nature that if he is omniscient, there is nothing. He doesn't do anything in a discursive kind of way. Discursive means in a series of events. So he's thinking, well, there's this, then there's this, then there's this, then therefore there's this. Let's see, I want to save human beings, and I'm gonna make them, and they're gonna mess up, so let me think about a way to do it. He doesn't think that way, because he doesn't come to conclusions. There in him there is no variation or shifting of shadow. Now James says this in James chapter 1. And so you can't have God working through a problem to try to get to a solution. This implies not only change on a fundamental level, but it also implies that God didn't know what he was going to do. He had to figure it out by getting more information. Now all of that is inconsistent with omniscience. In other words, there never was when God had not planned to rescue the world the way he did. It was part of his eternal plan and purpose. In fact, this is the way the New Testament characterizes it in a number of places, what God has always purposed to do. So the Trinity has always consisted of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. In God's perfect plan, Jesus always intended to come in the same form of those created in his image. And, of course, you're saying Jesus now, but strictly speaking, if we're going to be very precise, the Word always intended to come in the form of those created in his image, and that form, physical self, was the person we know of as Jesus, the human being. And it does not necessarily follow that if God were to create anything, it would have to include beings made in his image. So I think we covered the basis for you there, Joel. Let's see, what do I have next? I have a couple here that are referencing verses that I actually haven't read, prepared for yet. So let's just jump down to Tiffany's question about women in ministry. Can we do that, Bearded Beast? All right. And he's more bearded than usual. I don't know, you haven't trimmed that thing for a while, have you? You're more beastly than usual. Here he comes to the mic. We're doing Tiffany on your thoughts on women in ministry, that one. Okay, thank you, Mr. Beast. Hi, Greg, my name is Tiffany, and you said you need more questions, so I have a few more questions. It's kind of a twofer here. First one is Luke 22, where it says, I think, 36. The second one on women in ministry, because I haven't read Luke 22, 36 yet. Sorry, Tiffany, I had to interrupt you. We're going to go to your next one. Hi, Greg, my name is Tiffany, and I have another question for you. Sorry, it's a little bit loaded, but I'd love to hear your thoughts on women's roles within the body, because I'm seeing a trend where ever someone stands on either side of the aisle, they kind of lump it all in together regarding women being able to have ministry positions or teach, and then women being pastors. And they're kind of just setting where they stand. And I think those are, they're very different topics in general, and it's just my opinion from what I'm getting from Scripture. And so I'd love to hear your thoughts on this. And yes, I know, 1 Timothy is where this all comes from, right? This is where it all stems, because Paul says that a woman is not to teach or have authority over a man. But then later in 2 Timothy chapter 4, he says, preach the word, be ready in season and out of season, correct, rebuke, and encourage with great patience in teaching. And then if you jump down to verse 5, he says, but as for you, exercise self-control in everything, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, fulfill your ministry. And yes, I know he's speaking to Timothy, technically, but I believe this is to the church, and we're able to take this and apply this into our lives. This is Paul's final letter, like that is a charge to the church. And Bill Cratchey actually spoke into this, and I have one powerful speech. Anyways, I digress. But this is obviously a point of tension you hear a lot of. I think I know where I land. I've listened to a lot of Mike Winger's things on this, and I think I fall more so in the category of, I don't believe women should be pastors, only because if marriage reflects God's design for the church, and I am to submit to my husband and he's to be the head of our household, how then am I to ever ask him to submit to a woman? And just personally, I see this as, you know, there's a battle raging, a spiritual battle, and I don't want to follow necessarily a woman in the battle. I would want to follow a man. Obviously, we're following Jesus, but you get what I'm saying. But yet I do believe women can teach and lead ministry roles and other things. So, but I would love to hear your thoughts. I really appreciate all you have to say, and I thank you very much for your time. And hopefully this made sense in all of the jumbling. No, no, it's good, Tiffany. Yeah, I appreciate the question. It's a big issue, and there's a lot that you've brought up. Let me just say one thing to kind of dispatch this. 2 Timothy, as is 1 Timothy, are what are called pastoral epistles, is that it? In other words, it's being written to Timothy as a leader. And so the excortations in 2 Timothy chapter 4, preach the word, be ready in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with great patience in your teaching. These are exhortations that Paul is giving to Timothy as a pastor. And as a pastoral epistle, a letter to a pastor, a pastor of pastors, maybe, it's meant to be understood as instruction to those in spiritual leadership, pastors. And Timothy was one of those, and so there was special instruction and encouragement given to Timothy. But it's how the pastors are to comport themselves with regards to the church, and there are lots of applications of the church, even though this is written to a person. I mean, you've got Philemon that is written to an individual about Onesiphorus, who is a slave that's been a runaway slave of his that's being returned. But just because it's written to an individual doesn't mean it doesn't have application.

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

to the rest of us in the same sense, we do want to understand what Paul was saying to Timothy as a pastoral epistle. He's giving him instructions and warning, the things that you've heard from me, for example, in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust a faithful man who will be able to teach others also. That's 2 Timothy 2.2. But that what Paul is doing is addressing Timothy as not only a pastor but as his disciple who is to disciple others who are to disciple others. So you've got a broad application of that particular verse. So my exhortation regarding 2 Timothy is just be careful. We want to keep in mind it's a pastoral epistle. That's the direct context. And then we want to make application from this to others in a way that's appropriate. Some things were told to Timothy as Timothy. Is that the passage? Is that the book where Paul tells Timothy, take a little wine for your stomach because you have these ailments? Or maybe that's 1 Timothy. I don't know. But in any event, so obviously there's going to be some things that are personal to Timothy and others broader personal to those who are shepherds, pastors, and then material that's going to be applicable to all Christians. So just keep that in mind when you're going through Timothy. That doesn't address the question, though, that you have raised about women in ministry. Part of the difficulty here is words that we use that have a bit of imprecision to them. Women, do you think women should be involved in ministry? Well, it kind of depends what you believe. What you mean by ministry. You say, should women be a pastor? Well, it kind of depends what you have in mind for pastor, OK? Look, you know, when women, if you say women are supposed to be pastors, let's just say that. No, not pastors. OK, but then some church has like the children's ministry is headed up by Pastor Jane. That is that they just gave her the title pastor because she's overseeing a group there, even though it's children. The fact that she is given the title pastor in that circumstance strikes me as completely irrelevant. You know, you can give a person the title of pastor and then say, well, no, women should be pastors, so she can't do that. Well, that's only because you gave her a title of pastor when you might have just said she's in charge of the kids. We don't have to give the pastoral title. Now, there are the word pastor is in the New Testament in Ephesians 4. It talks about pastor teachers. And that seems to be referring to a chief role of leadership in the church. But, you know, I I guess the point that I want to make is You we need to decide what's appropriate biblically for a woman to do in the local body, regardless of the language that you use or the labels you use to describe that individual. So you just get rid of the pastor word. Can a woman do this, that or the other? That's the question that needs to be answered. Now, some will say, I don't think a woman should be allowed to teach any men. And that comes from the 1 Timothy chapter 1 passage. Make that chapter 2. And I think that, well, chapter 2 has a lot in it. And there are two major sections. Oh, I'm sorry, I'm misreading here. Chapter 2 has one thing, and chapter 3 has something else. The chapter divisions are artificial, but that doesn't matter. We're just talking about two sections here. Now, chapter 3 talks about elders and deacons. Now, as I read chapter 3, it strikes me that those who are elders, or called overseers in this passage, these are the governing, this is the governing body of the church. Paul restricts that office to men. And here's what he says. It's a trustworthy statement if any man aspires to the office of overseers, it is a fine work he desires to do. An overseer then must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, prudent, respectable. And then there's other characteristics. He must be one who manages his own household well, keeping his children in control with all dignity. But if a man does not know how to manage his own household, how can he manage or take care of the church of God? Now, notice that there is the presumption in all of that description that we're talking about men as elders. And I would take the senior pastor role to be functional eldership. I mean, sometimes it's the senior pastor that's head of all the elders, you know. And so, I think this disqualifies a woman from being on the leadership team of the church and therefore also disqualifies women from being a lead pastor. Now, in the rest of the chapter, it talks about deacons. Deacons are helpers. I understand, by the way, in churches in the South, some Baptist churches, they use these terms in the opposite way. The elders are the ones who, you know, serve, and the deacons are the ones who govern. That's not the biblical use of the language. Elders govern. Deacons serve, OK? And we get that from, what, Acts 7 or whatever, in the Hellenistic Jews, the widows were not being taken care of adequately and there was a problem. And they said, OK, they assigned the first deacons of which Stephen was one and diakonos. And they were the ones who served the tables because the apostles, they said, you know, we've got to pray. We've got to minister the Word. You guys serve the tables. So the deacons, now you still have that office, obviously. We have deacons. We have helpers. And now, when we see the description there starting at verse 8, deacons, likewise, must be men of dignity. Hmm, men, not double-tongued or addicted to much wine, fond of sordid gain. These men must also be first tested. Women, verse 11, must likewise be dignified, not malicious gossips, but temperate, faithful in all things. Deacons must be husbands of only one wife and good managers of their children, et cetera. Now, there's an ambiguity here because it does seem like some of the same language is being used of deacons as of men, but it says here women must be also like the men that would be in a deacon role. Now, it might be referring there to the wives of the husbands who are the deacons. I'm not sure. But I'm open to the idea, I'd have to study further, of women being deaconesses. But it does seem to emphasize even in deacons that men are involved. But that doesn't answer the question about women having other kinds of roles in the church, including teaching. And this brings us to chapter 2, and I saved it for the last because it's the more, I think, mis understood is what I would say, but also controversial. And there's lots of strained readings of this. So I did a lot of analysis of this a number of years ago, and I probably wrote a piece about it that you might find on our website for further analysis. But I discovered something that is relevant here. What I discovered is that the Greek words for man and woman, aner for man and gune for woman, are the same Greek words used to translate husband and wife, aner and gune. So how would you know in any given passage where aner and gune was being used, whether it should be translated man and woman or husband and wife? And the answer is the context is going to determine that. OK, so you have in John chapter 1, you have those who are born of the spirit, not of the will of aner, nor of the... well, let me find it just because I think that this is where the NIV, if you mark Luke, John, I think gets it wrong, but it just seems so odd the way they do it. But in any event, John chapter 1, OK, born. OK, here it is. But as many as... 12 and 13. As many as received him, to them he gave the right to become children of God, even to those who believe in his name, who were born not of blood, nor of the will of aner, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Now that seems to be referring to human beings as humans, not aner as husbands. But the NIV translates this, not the will of a husband. It just seems so foreign. The point I'm making is the context is going to determine how you translate it. So now what about chapter 2? Well, in my translation, New American Standard and virtually every other translation, you have these words translated man and woman. But the problem with that rendering...

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

of an on-air gunay is it sets up an odd set of circumstances. All right? And let's pick it up here in verse 12, verse 11. A woman, a gunay, must quietly receive instruction with entire submissiveness. Well, she's going to be entirely submissive to somebody. Who is that? Verse 12, but I do not allow a woman, gunay, to teach or exercise authority over a man, on-air, but to remain quiet. For it was Adam who was first created and then Eve, et cetera. Now, what's odd about this is if this is a command regarding women and men, then it looks like Paul is saying that all women are under all men, that every woman should receive instruction from any man with entire submissiveness. And by the way, the way this is constructed, and I'm not the Greek guy, but I understand some of how this is put together by other teachers have made that clear to me. When it says teach or exercise authority over a man, but to remain quiet in verse 12, there's a sense of usurping authority. So the authority is to the man if the woman doesn't receive instruction with entire submissiveness, but tries to teach the man, she's usurping his authority. Now, I think the problem is that you have a man and a woman in a relationship here, or they're connected in the text, but what is being said about them as men and women seems odd, partly for the reason that I said, any woman that's listening to me right now, you need to receive what I say quietly with entire submissiveness because that's what verse 11 says. A woman must quietly receive instruction with entire submissiveness, but I do not allow her to teach or exercise authority over a man, but to remain quiet. That does not sound like sound instruction because that would create a radical situation. That doesn't just mean that women don't teach men. It means that all women have to submit to all men. And then I realized, wait a minute, it's the same word for husband and wife, as for man and woman. I wonder how that works. If I were to translate this man and woman that are connected to each other in the context is not as man and woman, but as husband and wife. Verse 9, likewise, I want wives, oh, I'm sorry, verse 11, a wife, so I'm changing the translation, but it's gunay. It could be translated either way, but listen to this. A wife must quietly receive instruction with entire submissiveness, but I do not allow a wife to teach or exercise authority, that would be usurp authority, over a husband, but to remain quiet. For Adam was created first and then Eve. I mean, that fits there too. That just makes complete sense. It fits the notion that the husband is the spiritual leader of the family. And the idea of the wife submissiveness to her husband is reiterated many places in the text. You have famously Ephesians 5. You also have 1 Peter 3. You've got Titus chapter 2. You've got 1 Corinthians 10. You've got lots of places where this kind of thing is mentioned, and this fits perfectly with that. Now, I've talked about this before, and there are people that are smart people that push back really hard on me on this thing, but I just don't see it. It can go either way with the Greek word. And translating this as wives and husbands creates no difficulty for the text like the other translation seems to do. And so I would say that this text is talking about marital relationships. It's not talking about life in the church, polity, whatever, ministry in the church. And I, you know, I hear, I've been involved with churches that have kind of monkeyed around with this. Oh yeah, we don't allow women—oh, we do allow women pastors as long as she's under a man and she's not usurping the authority. Okay, well, wait a minute. That isn't what it says here. It says, I don't allow a woman to teach or exercise any authority over a man. And by the way, notice the articles there. A woman, not women. And sometimes this is misquoted, by the way. People just, hey, women are supposed to, etc., can't teach men. That's what a woman. What particular woman? A wife, that fits. I do not allow a woman to teach or exercise authority over a man, the definite article once again. That makes more sense if it was a husband, that particular man, the one that's husband, the husband, but to remain quiet. Anyway, that's the way I take that. Now, there still are unanswered questions. I don't actually see any liability of women being involved in all aspects of ministry, even teaching from the pulpit, but not taking on pastoral authority. But I think that's a violation of chapter 3. I mean, I have friends, female apologists, who are getting a lot of heat because they are supposed to be, you know, almost barefoot and pregnant at home taking care of the kids, and there they are on the stages around the country teaching and speaking, and this is a violation of 1 Timothy 2. I don't see that at all. I think they are being useful in the body of Christ. They are not exercising authority in that local church. They're just teaching as they're able. So, I mean, that's my take. It can be refined further, but I hope that helps. I think one person made an observation. He said that the workers are few and divided by two when there's a very vigorous attempt to keep women out of functional service in the body of Christ. If you remove the word pastor from a lot of their titles, probably most of the women that are involved in stuff like that would be able to operate freely. The only liability is they're called pastor in that community. All right, then don't call them pastors. Call them something else. But if they are functioning as a head pastor in the church and functioning as an elder and leadership, then I think it's a liability. But that's because of chapter 3 of 1 Timothy, not chapter 2. There you go, Tiff. I hope that's helpful. You have a bunch more questions here, but some of them have to do with verses that I have to look up. Okay, here's, let's see, does, okay, Brandon. Let's take Brandon, the second one about Jesus being the only way. It's 54 seconds long. You see that? Say it. Tiffany, Tiffany, Brandon. Hi, Greg. This is Brandon again. Recently, my pastor approached me to ask me about any references I could give for arguments that people in the congregation could use to defend the idea of Christian exclusivity. My pastor was working on a sermon about John 14, 6, where Jesus says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. No man comes to the Father but by me. One of the places I referred him to was your book, Street Smarts. In chapter 12, in the On the Street section, you have a number of arguments to defend the idea that Jesus is the only way. I was wondering if you had any other thoughts on how to defend Christian exclusivity for someone who might not be really into apologetics, somebody who's just a lay person, and if you had any other references beside your own books that might talk about that. Thanks very much for all you do. I'll be eager to hear your answer. All right, Brandon, I appreciate that. I can't remember what I wrote, Street Smarts, 70,000 words. I'd have to look at it, but I do have an answer. That Jesus is the only way is a matter of revelation. We believe that Jesus is the only way because Jesus made the claim, and he verified the claim through the miracles that he did. Jesus said in John 5, he says, if you don't believe in me, my claim to be Messiah, not because I said it, but because of the miracles that I work, the works that I do, okay? And so this was bearing testimony. Paul says in Romans right at the beginning, he says that Jesus was declared with power to be the Son of God through the resurrection. Okay, so what we have is a gargantuan claim that Jesus makes, but then we have reason that is offered or evidence that the claim is actually true, miracles or his resurrection, etc. But the claim is a matter of revelation. Or even if you just take it not as God's—

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

word, but as, well, this is what Jesus claimed. He was the only, do we have reason to believe that he was right? Okay, that's part of it. So what we can do is look at the historical record, not as the inspired word of God, but just as an historical record of Jesus' life that we have reason to believe is reasonably accurate, at least in its salient details. And you can't, you can't have any characterization of Jesus from any of that historical material. Who's not a supernatural Jesus. It just can't be done. If you take the supernatural out of the gospels, you don't have any Jesus left, right? Certainly not anybody that, you know, would be, anyone would be willing to follow. So, or kill for that matter. So the claim is a claim that Jesus made and whether the claim is true or not is whether Jesus validated it. So there's one aspect of this that, as, what is the evidence for the life of Jesus? That may be part of what I said there in Street Smarts. I'm not sure. But another aspect is that people dismiss this out of hand, this kind of claim that Jesus is the only way, because it just sounds so bizarre. And what they need is something else that's analogous to help them to realize that this is not a bizarre claim. It's the kind of claim that, that can make a lot of sense if it can be verified. For many people, it's just so bizarre. I'm not even thinking about it. No way. That's crazy. That's ridiculous. And I've seen some clips from YouTube influencers that have just, just went off on this because it just seems so weird. But that's because they don't understand. And in the story of reality, I try to work it all out. I mean, that singular problems, we'll just call it the problem of evil now, writ large, singular problems oftentimes have singular solutions. Well, that's not weird. Of course, certain types of things are such that only a unique set of circumstances can meet that need. It's just the way it is. Medicine comes to mind. And maybe this can be offered as an illustration. Now, keep in mind this, these illustrations are just meant to blunt the force of what people think is the absurdity of the claim. It's not absurd for there to be one way. Well, you find out you have cancer. All right. You get surgery, chemo or radiation, or maybe all three. But you're not going to eat ice cream sundaes to take care of the cancer. All right. You're not going to get an appendectomy to take care of the cancer. It's the wrong thing to take care of that thing. Singular problems have singular solutions. Now, of course, in order to know the solution, you have to have a sense of what the actual problem is. You have to have a diagnosis and then you have to have a solution that matches the diagnosis. So there are a number of things that are involved here. Are human beings guilty? That's one question. Well, everybody feels guilty. Who doesn't sooner or later. And I would be very comfortable asking somebody, excuse me, have you ever felt guilty? Yeah, sure. Why? Because I did something bad. There you go. So you did something bad. You feel guilty because you are guilty. Now what? That's bad news. OK, how do you deal with guilt? Not denial. The answer to guilt is not denial. It's forgiveness. Forgiveness. That's what deals with guilt. And so what I'm trying to do is help people have a richer understanding of what we're facing diagnosis and solution and antidote. And if we get our diagnosis correct, and I think the way I just posited the problem is a way that resonates with people's intuitions. You know, most people think something's wrong. And so they're trying to they're trying to deal with their guilt. And so we say, yeah, OK, we got the solution. By the way, it's singular because guilt is a singular problem. And there there's a very particular kind of solution. Either you pay or Jesus pays. How about that? So all I'm doing here is working with kind of illustrative elements, parallels or analogs or ways of putting it that can help. A person see that the claim that Jesus made to be the only way is not so bizarre. It's not so completely off the wall any more than a doctor says you got to have the tumor removed. That's it, or you're a dead man. And after that, we're going to do chemo just in case there are lymph nodes. And when that's all done, you got to have radiation. You want to be cured of this? This is it. This is the regimen. Oh, I don't like that. Well, that has ain't got nothing to do with it, whether you like it or not. Has to do with your nature of your sickness and the nature of the solution. That's what matters here. And so if we can help people see, for one, something like singular problems often have singular solutions, and therefore they're open. Then we have to show what is the singular problem that we're all facing that Jesus is the solution for. And I go into detail on that in the story of reality. But the simple answer is that Jesus is the only way because he's the only one who solved the problem, the problem that needs to be solved. And it's the sin problem. So hopefully that's Brandon. That's some some things you can use, your pastor can use and help the people understand to communicate. You know, I think I hope that's useful. Let's see. All right, Kyle, we have Kyle. This isn't you, is it? This isn't Greg. Hey, this is Kyle from Texas. OK, it is a pleasure. Thank you for everything that you do. I have just one question. I've recently been faced with an odd situation where some loved ones have gotten involved in a church, a house church, if you will, that I believe is teaching and preaching things contrary not only to classical Christianity, classical Christian views, but contrary to the gospel itself. And I am not exactly sure how to approach it. I'll give you a couple of examples. They're visited by this traveling preacher who comes from Florida and visits with them every couple of months or so. And when he's in town, they meet 10, 12 hours a day and everyone takes off of work and they treat this guy as if he's the second coming of the Messiah. Now, maybe that's an exaggeration, but they treat him as certainly as a prophet. And they teach things, everything from sinless perfectionism to sinless perfectionism leading to perfect health, meaning you do good, you get good. And certain levels of heaven. Salvation is separate from eternal life. You get salvation through accepting Christ as your savior. You get to heaven based on your good works. I just got done listening to your one episode on annihilism and kind of the thought, you know, is somebody's belief core to salvation or is it something that is not really worth our time spending too much time, at least arguing about? I'm having a feeling that this is more core to salvation rather than the opposite. And I don't know exactly how to approach it. Is this a love from a distance kind of thing, love and pray from a distance, or is it good to get involved and actively pursue my loved ones who are currently caught up in this? I really appreciate your insight. Thank you. God bless. Well, Kyle, I appreciate the question. This is a tough situation. There was a talk I used to give that was titled How to Keep from Becoming Spiritually Weird. And I was looking at a number of different pathways to weirdness to avoid. And this is one of them where you have a small group of people that are led by a charismatic leader who now you didn't say this here, but a lot of times their their approach is I've got the truth and my little peculiar parochial take on things is the true way and everybody else is out to lunch and off the reservation. I will share myself with you, this inside group, and you've got the the inside, you know, take on things, you know, the dope on it. And this is that circumstance is very dangerous. And your family is already involved in it. Now, I don't know if he's his view. We're just shining off all the rest. And I'm the true deal. But his views are odd. A sinless perfection, perfectionism. There are there are some denominations that teach that.

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

They have to, in order to teach this, they got to change their definition of sin or they change their definition of perfect, because sinless perfectionism was only characteristic of one human being in all of human history. And he was born that way. All the rest, you know, were a mess. So that's odd, but it's, I would say that's not off the reservation. However, when it gets into perfect health business, that's that's a new twist on that sinless perfectionism. That's weird. So if I was listening to somebody, I would be thinking, wait a sinful perfectionism? No way. That's not sound. It's heterodox, not heretical, but odd and not sound. And but then when he started to, you know, ramp up into perfect health and then salvation different from eternal life? No, especially when eternal life is based on works. I don't know what salvation would mean in this sense, but the the works righteousness that gets us eternal life, that is off the reservation completely. And what's really sad is we're not just talking about something theoretical here. We're talking about people you love and care for. And this is a circumstance where I would be, I would not just keep it at arm's length in the distance. I would say, I think that this is not a good thing. What you are experiencing with this teacher is dangerous. It is not the truth. And you just be straightforward with him, gracious, kind, but the teaching in the New Testament about the grace of God. Just look at the book of Galatians, for example. This is exactly what Paul is addressing. They start out in the spirit and they're trying to work it out in the flesh. He said, no, you foolish Galatians, who's bewitched you? He says in chapter 5, if you're getting circumcision in order to keep the law, you are under obligation to keep the whole law. You have severed yourselves. You have been severed from Christ. Grace, it's either grace or works. It's not one or the other. I'm sorry, it is one or the other. It's not both. And this is works. It's not grace. And if you're on a works treadmill, then you've got to do everything perfectly and nobody can do that. And so that's what this particular individual is advancing. And I would be very strong with them and say, I am deeply concerned. This person is not somebody you should be following. He is distorting the truth of the gospel. And I don't know, prophet, if they're looking up to him as a prophet. I don't know what qualifies this individual as a prophet. But these kind of people are dime a dozen. I'm just telling you. I've seen, been down the pike many times with this, you know, over 50, what, three years as a follower of Christ. Now I got, I've seen this kind of thing come around many times, which is why I included it in the talk, what, 30 years ago. Here's one way you're going to get weird by following, having a small group of people led by a charismatic leader who thinks he's got it all together and knows the truth that nobody else knows. Bad news. All right. And these particular things, I'm sure there are more because you intimated that these particular things are just bad. Sinless perfectionism is a killer because even though there's some legitimate denominations that seem to teach that, nobody can attain to it, and therefore, unless they redefine sin or perfection, and therefore they're going to be frustrated all their lives. This is one thing that makes Mormonism so difficult is because they're striving, striving, striving, striving, striving to keep these, all of these things that are required to become a god. And they just can't do it. You cannot live up to it. The psalmist says, Lord, this is 132 or 33, somewhere in there, Lord, if you should mark iniquity, oh Lord, who could stand? Oh Lord, who could stand? No one can stand if that's the measure. And your family, Kyle, are going to be overwhelmed. Members that are involved here are going to be overwhelmed with their own incapacity, the incapability that they have to fulfill this demand. The law requires perfection, but no one is perfect. And if you pursue God on that basis, you are severed from Christ. That's Galatians 5. Just read it. Now, he's using circumcision as an example of those who are seeking to be justified by law. So just keep in mind, there's a parallelism. If you receive circumcision, Christ will be of no use to you. You who are seeking to be justified by law, you are obligated to keep the entire law. See the parallelism there. That's what he's talking about. I mean, that's what's going on here. Works. And that is always a killer. It doesn't matter what denomination you're in. But this is, it's unfortunate, and I thank you for your concern about your family members who are caught up in this. But just be straightforward with them. This is bad news. This is not a good situation. What he's teaching is not true. Where is he getting his information from? I mean, 10 to 12 hours at a shot? Nothing wrong with that. I mean, there were traveling preachers. But now he's the authority because he's the prophet. And the things that he's teaching, maybe they started out sounding okay, but then they start getting weird, and this is weird. It's unsound. And consequently, it's going to destroy their lives one way or another. If they believe like he is teaching, they're not Christian. They're Pelagian or something. You know, they're trusting in their own works, their own capability. That is not good news. I mean, think about that. It's not good news. It's bad news. That's why Jesus said in the Sermon on the Mount, you know, the first, right after all the blessed, blessed, blessed, you've got to keep the whole law. You call your brother a fool, you're going to hell. You even think about adultery, you're going to hell. That's what the law demands. That's right there in Matthew 5. Read it. That's a paraphrase, of course, but that's the point. So I hope this helps, Kyle. This is not a good situation your family members are in. Speak truth to them in love, all right? All right, friends, that's it for today. Thank you for being part of it. Greg Kokel here for Stand to Reason. Give them heaven, okay? Bye-bye.
