# Interview: Jon Noyes – Noyes on the Streets

- Publication date: 2026-03-25
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/a1fce173-9d2c-3280-84e9-0a90bfa8ebfa`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Well, hello, friends. Greg Kokel here at Stand to Reason. I actually had somebody this last weekend when I was, where was I? In Detroit, and they asked me about that noise that comes at the end of the introduction, that randy, randy, randy, what was that? He thought it was a mistake. No, that was actually me making a rooster sound about 40 years ago. No, it was more like 30 years ago. And somebody in the studio when I was at KBRT recorded it. I was goofing around making animal sounds, and it just became part of the show. In fact, I've got a squeaky rooster right here that someone gave me. I don't touch it very often because it's noisy. But that's what that is. That's just me making a rooster sound. And it's become an icon. We'll probably never get rid of it. So anyway, speaking of noise, Stand to Reason is always trying to think of new ways to impact not only the world with what we can do well, and also in the process help you do that better too. It's a training tool. And we have a new project on board that you can take advantage of online. And it is being headed up by one of the wonderful talents we have at Stand to Reason, the big, the bad, and the bald, and the beautiful. Now, forget the bad part, John. The big, the bald, and the beautiful, John Neuhs. John, welcome to the show, buddy. Hey, thanks for having me, Greg. You upgraded me to the 4Bs, not the 3. The 4Bs, yeah, but the bad doesn't, unless you think like bad being cool, like totally cool. And you guys can notice every once in a while he slips into his native tongue. The go pocky car, the odd stuff, and being from Boston. But I think, John, that's what makes you kind of unique. Now, I'm trying to remember, how long have you been on board with Stand to Reason as a speaker? Yeah, this is crazy. It's going to be seven years coming up. Oh, my goodness. Which is nuts. Yeah, it is nuts. I mean, the days drag on and the years fly by. You know, that's just crazy. I don't even know if I have much—seven years from now, who knows? If it goes as fast as the last seven years, that's not good for me because, you know, the grains are falling faster, you know, in the hourglass now than they ever did before. It happens when you get older. Things move faster. That's one of the things that your parents always tell you and you don't believe them until you're a parent. Until you're as old as your parents were, and then you start feeling it a lot. But anyway, you know, I mentioned the noise. That's your last name. But sometimes you capitalize, you can capitalize on interesting things. I don't know how to capitalize on the cocle part. I was called all kinds of names when I was a kid. Coclepuff, coclebud, coconut, all kinds of stuff. Never bothered me at all because it was unique. Did you have a hard time growing up because your name was noise or it didn't bother you? No, it never bothered me. Everybody just called me noise or noisy or it was an easy nickname. I never had to worry about what creative ideas people are going to come up with. And you're a big guy. You didn't pound him when they made fun of you like that or you just took it in stride? Maybe I should be asking you this question because you were always— It was always an athlete. So it was like the—it was your buddies on the team who made up the nicknames and it was always just noise. So it worked, but you were a pastor for five years. I was a pastor. And it's kind of a little awkward to be Pastor Noise. I guess so. But people don't call you by your last name when you're a pastor. It's always just Pastor John. Oh, okay. That's true. Yeah. And now I just ask that people don't call me pastor. It's just John. It's like a guy whose last name is Butcher, and he's a surgeon, Dr. Butcher. I'm actually seeing that before. So anyway, so we've got John noise with us. And John, he does make noise, but it's good noise of all sorts for seven years for Stand to Reason. And we actually have kind of an interesting history that goes back before we met personally. You want to say something about that? Absolutely. So when I was an atheist and I was just coming into Christianity, I'd been introduced to Christian apologetics by a couple of books and a pastor. And I started listening to this— That would be Pastor to us English speaker. Pastor, pastor. And I started—I tried to fix the accent. It's not going to work. I started listening to a drive time, like three-hour radio program, and it was this guy, Greg Koukl, who was making absolutely no sense because, you know, I disagreed with what you were saying, a lot of what you were saying. And I remember having an argument with you. I had lots of arguments with you. I listened to you and I listened to Frank Pastore a lot. Oh, yeah, Frank. He's gone on to be with the Lord. Frank and I were students in the MA Phil program under J.P. Moreland before he got behind a microphone at KKLA. Is that what it was? KKLA, yeah. Yeah, I used to do a radio show from that actual studio. Yeah, yeah, that's great. So I just think it's interesting. Pardon me, and I use this as a—I make a point of this when I talk about gardening and how important gardening is because you never know who's listening. When as I'm gardening in this medium, for example, or whether I'm in a stage or something like that, I'm gardening, gardening, gardening. And it turns out you were in my garden. Yeah, I most certainly was. Jay Warner Wallace and Abdu Murray, and I've learned this later, and I think it's kind of interesting. You don't even have a recollection of a conversion experience, no spiritual birthday. No, no. It was like three months of pretty intense—I was just looking into the Christian worldview, taking for the first time maybe taking the Christian worldview seriously, and then also for the first time taking my naturalism seriously and seeing how those actually explained the world around us. And then I also—I mean, I read the Bible cover to cover over that time. Well, you mean seeing with the naturalism, I think what you meant is seeing how it actually doesn't explain the world around us, right? Is that your point? That's right. Yeah. Because we've had—I've heard you talk about bumping into reality, you know, and bumping into these, as an atheist, bumping into these features of the world that make no sense in regard to your atheism, but make perfect sense with regards to a Christian worldview. And this became, I guess, an evidential element that moved you towards Christ. So you don't—did you ever have like a point of realization? No, I guess I am one of those screwy Christians now. I got to admit it. Yeah, you know, it probably came. I don't have that moment in time like to that spiritual birthday like you can point back to. Right. But there was definitely a time, actually a time of gathering, like what you say, right? There was a substantial time where people were sowing into my life. I didn't realize it, but they were evangelizing me at the time. And then I remember when I really figured I was cooked, I was looking into the evidence for Jesus and his resurrection, and I remember it was probably Habermas or one of these guys that I was reading. And I remember closing the book, and I was in my apartment in Hollywood, and I remember closing it and thinking like, Oh, you know what? I got this Jesus problem solved from a naturalistic perspective. And what I thought was, oh, well, aliens probably came down and beamed this dead Jesus guy up and applied their super alien technology, medical technology, and beamed him down. And then, like, almost in an instant, Greg, I thought to myself, how much evidence do I have for aliens? And then the next question that popped into my mind is, what is it that I'm trying so desperately to avoid here? Because it doesn't seem like it's a lack of evidence that's keeping me from believing in God. There's something else. And that hit me like a ton of bricks. And that's when I started, actually, I think then, like what God did is he kind of opened up my conscience a little bit. And for the first time, I was seeing that, well, I wasn't as clever as I thought I was. It wasn't nearly as good as I thought I was. And I came to the realization that I needed a rescue or a savior. And that is, for anybody who's listening, that's been in through this similar journey, that's a moment in time you'll never forget where you realize you're guilty. And not just guilty before people that you live with, but guilty before a holy and a just God. Yeah, who sees everything. Yeah. I was thinking of your alien option.

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

Amazing what some people will opt for rather than what seems to be the best explanation for the way things are, given the evidence for the resurrection in this case, that when the disciples said, this person, this man who you crucified, God raised up again to which we are witnesses, that's the best explanation. And I remember hearing a debate with William Lane Craig and Greg Cavan, and he was a local professor at a junior college I'd actually gone to. He's invited me to his class a number of times to give presentations in his philosophy class in the past. But the debate at UC Irvine was, so I mean, UC Irvine, this is a big school, and there were a lot of people there, and what Cavan was advancing was the twin theory that Jesus had an identical twin and they were separated at birth. And after Jesus was crucified and thrown into a pit, his body thrown into a pit or whatever, then his doppelganger, basically his identical twin, happened to walk into town, saw an opportunity and presented himself as the risen Christ. Now, I don't think Greg Cavan actually believed that. I'm not sure, but he said, this is a much more likely possibility than that Jesus rose from the dead. And Bill Craig's response was, if that's where you got to go to try to deny the resurrection of Jesus, the twin theory, we're in pretty good shape. That's what he said to the audience. And the same would apply to the alien option. Whenever somebody brings that up, like, this is a better, more plausible explanation than a resurrection, that's only true if we live in a naturalistic world, right? If we live in a supernatural world, resurrection is plausible. That's right. That's right. Especially if the first miracle happened in the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth. If that's the best explanation for the origin of the universe, then all the rest is small potatoes by comparison, the big thing God can do, the other things that he can do. Now, since then, you've been just gung ho for the Lord. You got a master's degree in apologetics from Biola under Craig Hazen. We met, actually, when you shared your testimony at our church. I mean, the church that you ended up serving at was my church, Living Oaks, there in Newberry Park. And I remember quite well that you got up and you gave a little bit about your testimony. And I thought to myself, I got to meet this guy. I just want to encourage him and whatever. And so I saw you after the church service. I said, I just introduced myself. I don't even know if I said my whole name. I think I might have just said, I'm Greg. And would you like to go to breakfast? Which you accepted. But I guess I wasn't unknown to you, obviously, since you had been fisticuffs verbally with me for those trips on the 405 freeway when I was broadcasting, right? Yeah. Well, it's more than that, Greg. Actually, I don't even know if you know this, but I looked up to you. I mean, I still do in many ways. But I looked up to you so much. I still, yeah. I've known you for a long time now, but I still do, kind of, look up to you. The Lesta hasn't won off, don't worry. All right. Yeah. But at this moment in time, all I knew of you was this voice coming out of this box, right? And I had read Tactics. And Tactics provided me a fundamental shift in how I do evangelism and actually just talk to people in general. I was working at a law firm at the time. That's what my background is in. So I was at a really great law firm. And I was employing tactics in my work, which was really fun. But then the law firm I worked at, so we represent a lot of famous people. So I hung with famous people all the time. Never did I get nervous. But that morning on that Easter Sunday when you came and introduced yourself to me, I was like shaking. Oh, my gosh. Yeah, it was Easter Sunday. And it was the end of like our fifth service or something, because we used to have five services. Yeah, I always go to the last one. I was rushing out of there to get home because we were having company, of course. And then you stopped me and I like completely geeked out. And then when you went back into the service, my two really good friends who actually went on to plant a church with were standing there and they were laughing at me so hard because I had turned like bright red and I was shaking. I was so nervous. And in the background, you were somebody that you were mentoring me for a long time without even knowing it, right? Through the radio, like you do so many people. And it got to the point that we had our first kid and I didn't get to choose any of the names. We had an agreement, Rihanna and I, that if there was a boy, I could name the boy. We've only had girls. So she names all the girls. And so she named our first Eva. And then when she found out that you had an Eva or have an Eva, she was like mortified. She would say like, well, what happens if one day you meet Greg or you become friends with him? And I'm like, I'm never going to meet Greg Coco. I'm never going to become friends with Greg Coco. And now here, the fast forward now, this is probably 13 years, 14 years now. Right, right, of our relationship, right. Yeah. And I'm like working with you. It's a dream come true. And your daughters a weekend before last were there in Philly at the Philly reality and it was great to have them. And they're stately young ladies, a couple of them. You've got a couple of younger ones too, but it's just great to have them and to see how all this has developed over the years in our relationship. And then after five years with a pastor, when you realized that you were done with that season of your life, I was very careful not to entice you at all while you're working for my pastor, you know, and my friend. Too careful. You were too careful. But when you became in a certain sense a free agent, then we started talking more about your maybe having a partnership with Stand to Reason. It's just been wonderful to see what God has done in the seven years now since you've been part of our team. You are actually, here, I want to say one of the things I really like about you and all of this is foundation for this project that has to do with Mr. Noyce here. N-O-Y-S-E, N-O-Y-S-E, however you want to characterize it. Because it'll help people have an understanding, I think, of why you're so well suited for this project that I want to talk about. And one of the things I've always appreciated about you, John, is, and you know that I tell people who ask, you know, how can I get involved in ministry? How can I do the kind of things that you do? And all that other stuff. And they have a very limited understanding of all that's entailed. But I give them two guidelines. And the guidelines are, bloom where you're planted and be a student of your craft. And anybody can do that wherever they're at and that gives them some motion, gives them something to do and gives them some motion that God then can direct sovereignly into wherever he wants to take them. And what I have always appreciated about you is when you, especially when you first started with Stand to Reason, you had no background history as a speaker with us. And it didn't matter what it was that came up, what opportunity, how small the audience, how far away it was, how whatever, John says, I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. And he took every single opportunity. And what's so rewarding, satisfying to me, is to see how that attitude of servanthood has served you so well to give you a wide variety of different experiences. And in those experiences, develop more and more as an effective servant for the kinds of things that we do. And now you're really busy. It seems like you're... Where were you last week? Was that Seattle with Ellen? I was in Seattle and then right after that. So this weekend I was in Palm Springs. Day before Palm Springs was Seattle. And then before that was... Where were we? Philadelphia. Philly. Reality. The weekend before. Busy. I mean, busy is not, is an understatement, but it's so much fun. We have the fortune of doing what we love. Well, there was one thing that came up a number of years ago in Dallas, and that was a pastor that was there. I don't know, this could have been six or seven years ago now. You'll have a better recollection of this. The pastor was going to do a breakout on suicide. And something happened with the pastor at the last minute. He couldn't do it. And so Drew Worsham stepped in. And Drew is, for those of you who have gone to Reality, and our last one's coming up in, I think it's five weeks from this weekend. It's the end of, towards the end of the month of April, the 24th and 25th, something like that. So Drew is the de facto MC for the whole thing. He's an illusionist. He really holds the whole thing together by his wonderful capability of engaging the audience. But Drew was pressed into service to do this class. And this class was wall to wall young people covering the floor, all the chairs, hanging out the door. And we realized, oh my goodness.

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

This is a real need. And Drew could keep continuing to do this, but we realized we have to have a talk on suicide every single reality. And in fact, not just one, but two. Where there's two breakouts, who's going to do it? And John, to your credit, having no experience, really, in anything like this before, you stepped up. And you raised your hand, as was so characteristic of your servant's attitude, and you said, I'll do it. And that has turned into a remarkably fruitful enterprise in the lives of so many people, but also my suspicion is one of the hardest things you've ever done. Yeah, for sure, on both accounts. It's definitely the most difficult talk, for obvious reasons. But it's also been the most rewarding. Because when you enter into people's mess, which is what you do ultimately when you give this talk, you enter into the mess with people. You also get to see it get cleaned up. And the nature of our work, at least with through reality, is what's been really significant for me, is that we go back oftentimes, well, oftentimes the same location, but even the same churches host us year after year after year. So you get to see these students in a broken state, or these adults, too. I mean, anybody in a really broken state. And you get to pray with them, and hear their story, and give them advice. And then a year later, you get to see them lifted up a little bit more. And then the year later, you get to see them lifted up even more. And even to this day, I'll see students who have been in the talk. They've been coming for four or five years. Every year they come. And I get to hear how much they've been impacted, and how they're doing well. So it's been rewarding, but really hard. Yeah, you're not likely to toot your own horn, but I just know, because of private conversations we've had, there have been students that came there anticipating, expecting, planning to take their own life, and they're still alive today. And they'll come back the following year and say, John, I'm still here. Thank you. And things are better. And I know I can see you getting choked up already, because it is hard to talk with John after he comes out of these sessions for which he stays for sometimes hours after the first breakout until it's ready to start the second breakout talking with these people. But it just communicates, and I don't mean to embarrass you here, John. Sorry. Oh, I'm not embarrassed at all. Well, it just communicates the kind of heart he has and has developed for this particular thing. And so he's a fixture at every reality with the breakout on that issue, and then also participating from the main stage in many ways as well. So what we have, and so when you come to those who come to our final reality for this year, which is Southern California, on what did I say? April 23 or 24. 24th and 25th. Do you have it there? I don't have a calendar. It's 24th and 25th. Okay, there you go. And it's filling up. I'm just saying last week's numbers were 1,250 or so, and that's six weeks away, and we're one-third, more than one-third full. Actually, we could hold 3,000 in the main sanctuary. We've got 500 overflow. So one-third full in six weeks out, and I don't know what the numbers are now. I have to check it out. But we would love to have you all come. John will be there. I'll be there. Alan Schlieman. Amy, the Ask the Apologist person, answering questions. Jay Warner Wallace is final reality with us. And unfortunately, we've had him for years and years and years, but he's just on to other things. And, well, he's a granddad, and he doesn't like to be away from his grandchildren or his wife. In any event, don't miss this one. Go to realityapologetics.com. Is that right or is it .org? Try them both. You'll probably get it. .com, it is. Amy'sahipologist.com. And you'll be able to see John in his different capacities, of course. And if this is what resonates with you at this point in your life, his very helpful talk on suicide. Now, but really, we're here to talk about something else that gives a background for you, John, for everybody who may not be familiar with the big, bald, and kind of bad, yet beautiful John Noyes. The new project that you have is appropriately called Noise on the Streets. That's right. Noise on the Streets. It's a video product, so it's being featured on YouTube. And you can find it by going to YouTube and just typing in Noise on the Streets. I think we have a link at the bottom of our homepage, str.org. You can also go to Google and Google Noise on the Streets. That would be plural streets. And you'll find it too. Tell us about this concept, John. Yeah, I'm actually really excited for this because what I'm doing is I'm taking kind of what we teach from the main stage, especially with the stuff that's impacted us so much through tactics. Kind of you pave the way with the book. And now I'm going out onto the streets to show how we can actually employ these efforts like out in the public sphere. But it's also, I want to make sure it's not just like my goal, my dream isn't that or my vision isn't that it's just something that's entertaining for us, but it's something that's a tutorial that then we can watch this and then learn how to actually take these tactics out and do the same thing. So instead of it just being a spectator event, I'd like to offer a teaching component, which is why like, so if you go to the YouTube channel now, you'll see a ton of shorts, you know, like 30 seconds or under a minute, but you'll also see some long form videos where then what I do is I go through an entire conversation I have with somebody, and then I break it down and say, hey, look, this is what I did here. Notice this when you watch the video, or this is what I should've done better. Let's go back a little bit and describe exactly what it is that you're doing just to give a context for the nature of this particular project called Noise on the Streets. Great. So yeah, so what I'm doing is I'm going out to various locations, like Santa Monica Pier, one of the local college campus I've been to, I went last year, I went to one of the protests in D.C. and I'm bringing these Christian kind of apologetic conversations into the public square by engaging most of the time it turns out to be non-Christians or skeptics or just people who might be curious. I'm engaging them with what my goal is to be thoughtful. So thoughtful, respectful, gospel-centered dialogue in a way that we can have a conversation about things that are very, very important, even in the midst of complete disagreement. I mean, we could be on the opposite ends of every spectrum, but I want to model what it looks like to be an ambassador, right, with knowledge, wisdom, and character, the ambassador model that we have at Stand to Reason. And so I just go out and engage people. And usually it starts by asking one of the Columbo questions or just noticing something somebody's saying or a sign that somebody's holding. The sign's the best. Like when you go to the protest, it's the easiest because you'll see a sign that says, you know, human rights for all people, right? So, okay, well, what do you mean by all people? You know, so yeah, I mean, you're pro-life, right? Oh, no, not really. And oh, okay, well, tell me about that one. So you're not, so you're excluding a large portion of the population. Why? You know, and we just engage. And it's a lot of fun. And one of the things that surprised me, Greg, about this is I'd say 85 to 90% of the time I'm out there, people want to talk. And, and they're fairly nice. I mean, you have to have a little bit of thick skin. Sometimes I get called a name, but most of the time people are at least willing to engage to a point, which is kind of fun, which makes it interesting. Yeah. How many of these now we are just releasing this now? I mean, kind of officially has it been, has it already been online for a bit? This is kind of the official launch. Is that right? That's right. So last month for about a month, for about four weeks, we've been posting stuff regularly. And we just, maybe 10 days ago, posted the first kind of longer teaching video. It's about seven minutes. And that's what served this. Wait, did you say teaching video, did you say, or the conversation? Teaching video. So what I'm doing is I'm breaking down the conversations I'm having and I'm trying to teach what exactly you can do or how I did it. Okay. So then maybe you can replicate it out in the public world. That reminds me a little of Red Pen Logic. So Tim Barnett is looking at a thing and then it's not just a matter of responding to this TikTok or whatever it is, you know, this meme, but he's, he's also being reflective on the process enough so that students or whoever, who's looking at it, can learn from how he did it. So this actually fits in so nicely with our, one of our DNA elements. I mean, what makes us us at Stand to Reason? And that is we don't just tell you what to think, we want to help you to know how to

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

Fine for some of your interviews, right? Yeah, it's so much fun. And I know you went to, is that when you're talking to the Muslim boys? Yes. Yeah, I remember seeing that one, and then sometimes you're on Santa Monica Pier or wherever, you know, West Coast stuff and on the beach and talking to people. And I think it's very interesting that people seem to be, regardless, largely open to having a discussion with you, even if you got a microphone in your hand and there's got to be a camera somewhere, is that a Greg Cash that's running the camera, our cameraman, you know? Yeah, Cash is usually following me around. And we do it two ways. Sometimes, like at the protests, I mic up on my shirt, my lapel, and Greg just follows me. I try to talk to people. We do a more formal, sometimes when, on Santa Monica Pier, for example, I actually use a prop to get in the conversations. I actually just showed pictures of famous people and asked if people could recognize these people. And the last picture is a picture of Jesus and everybody recognizes who Jesus is. So it's just a great way. They saw him in the movie. They saw him in the movie. Yeah, so, well, hopefully more than that, but they, you know, but then I'll just ask them a question and be like, why do you think Jesus is the most recognizable person in this lineup? That's great. You know, and then you're off and running. Yeah, that's great. Well, there's all kinds of tremendous opportunities that you have with these folks on the street to have conversations with them and it could go in a myriad of different directions. So I'm just curious, has anything surprised you about your experiencings so far with talking to strangers on the street, moving towards spiritual conversations? And do you usually get, once you start with somebody, are you able to get into a spiritual conversation with them characteristically? So that's the one question. And the second one is, what, have you been, had any surprise, some things that surprised you? You didn't expect. Yeah, I don't find it difficult to engage in spiritual conversations with people. And I'm wondering if that, now that you ask the question, I haven't really thought of this. Like, I wonder if it has more to do with me or more to do with the people I'm talking about or talking to rather. But I haven't had a problem like shifting from a more, like a broad question, what do you mean by that kind of question into steering it towards spiritual things, especially because I think our, our culture right now is, everybody's talking about moral issues. So whenever you're talking to people, it's, it's the conversation, certainly strangers eventually it's so easy to steer it into a moral, moral way. And once you're into morals, it's what's that? When you say everybody's talking about moral issues, are you saying that this is a topic of intelligent conversation or are you, or, and or is it people complaining about invasions of their life that they think are morally wrong or all of the above, or give some examples there? Sure. Well, the protest is an easy example because I go to a protest. It was a hands-off protest or women's March in Washington, DC. So I was surrounded by 20,000 people. I didn't see anybody there I agreed with, by the way, like it was nobody, at least I could see, you know? And so like everybody there is for a, at least a similar purpose. And that is to show their objection to something that is going on in the culture, whether it be their view on immigration or their view on abortion or their view on whatever it might be. So those, all of those issues I just listed are moral in nature. Every issue, as far as I can tell, that has to do with the law or government is a moral issue. So when we get that in mind, it's, it's already, you're starting out from a moral perspective. So like the, there's a video coming out this week where I talked to people about where do we get our rights from? And I forget what the sign was that she was holding, but I asked her like, where do we get our rights? And the normal response that most people on the street are going to give you is that they get it from the government. Right. And then you just draw out the principle, say, well, if the government gives us our rights, can the government take them away? You know, it's what, and maybe this is what is, I wish it didn't surprise me, but it does the most is oftentimes when you say stuff like that to people, it's the first time they've ever even thought in that kind of category, which to me is kind of shocking. Yeah. It's, yeah, it's been, it's been eye-opening to me how thoroughly relativistic our culture is across the board. I'm just wondering if, given that point, government gives us our rights, then the government takes the rights away. And if government is the grounding of rights, then the question that comes to my mind is then if you think the government is mistaken, what is the grounds of your appeal? Right. How can you say, no government, you can't take that right away from me. I have a right to that right, but now you're appealing to something beyond the government, you know? And I agree when I've had conversations akin to that, it's like deer in the headlights. They have never thought about it. And I remember a conversation with a young lady. I was, I spoke at USC to some kind of legal group. These were law students. And after the presentation, a girl, a woman, a young lady came up to me and she said, I think that animals, she said, I'm an, here's how she identified herself. She said, I'm an animal, I'm an atheist animal rights activist. And I said, now in this case, they made a statement. I didn't ask a question first, but nevertheless, I said, I think you're going to have a hard time making sense out of the statement you just made to me. And she said, what do you mean? I said, you think that animals have rights? And I think that I have a right to half of your income. Now you tell me the difference between our two statements because they both are groundless, as it turns out. If you're an atheist, how can you claim that animals have rights? And how can I claim that I have a right to you? They're baseless. And I'm telling you, it was the deer in the headlights moment. She had never thought about it. And she's a law student at USC or was so many years ago. So that's, that I think is one of the advantages of doing what you're doing in noise on the streets, where you can, you can present these questions to people regarding these issues. And everyone watching on the screen, and this is part of the, the benefit from an educational perspective, can see what actually takes place and how many people are, are just in a certain sense, clueless as how to respond to defend the things that they say are true. I often say when I teach, and I did this last weekend, when I taught in Michigan on tactics, the Columbo tactic, I said, when you start asking questions, always beware or be ready for what I call, you know what's coming here, the Simon and Garfunkel moment, you know, what's that? Well, that, those are the guys who wrote the sounds of silence. And when you ask a fair question that people have, should have thought about a lot of times you get dead air. You get the sounds of silence, right? And that's true. Yeah, that's true. Have you had any, I asked you, did I ask you just what, what has surprised you? And maybe it's surprising that people don't have answers to the things that they say they believe. Is that, is that a fair way of summing that up? Yeah, they've, it surprised me how relativistic people are. They've definitely been taught how to think, just not well. That's the wrong way of thinking. Yeah, that's the wrong way of thinking. But that's part of, I think, the, at least my hat behind the project is I'm not looking to make people look stupid. Yes, of course not. You know, I'm trying to, I'm trying to show both the audience that I'm speaking to on the video, but then also people watching the audience. I'm showing this, how, instead of like debating to win an argument or get shock value in a video, I want to model how to ask good questions and then listen to what people are saying and then respond with the things that we teach at Stand to Reason, you know, with clarity and grace. So after your interaction with the people, is it characteristic that you have a debrief with the audience with each one or sometimes yes, sometimes no, or maybe this is what the teaching segments amount to? Yeah. So the way, the way it looks practically is that I go and I film stuff on the streets and then we bring that footage back and then I watch all the footage and I pull out, or even actually while I'm on the street, I'll take notes and jot it down and say, oh, remember this conversation with this and so I can go back to it. And then after all is said and done, I create the teaching videos after we review it and kind of, it's almost like a half critique, but half also like a tactical approach. How to actually go out and do this yourself. Sure. So when, I mean, that's your production and post-production stages, but when people go to YouTube to see Noise, N-O-Y-E-S, by the way, you got to get the spelling right here, N-O-Y-E-S.

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

Yes, John's last name. Noise on the streets. Are they going to get the whole piece, that is the interview and your instructor material kind of attached to the end, and that's the packages that they'll be able to experience when they watch these? Yeah, so they're going to get a little bit of everything. So they'll get shorter clips that they can just watch parts of a conversation, and then they'll get larger conversations with me in the middle of those conversations, interjecting the teaching moments. Oh, I see. That's built in, that's spliced in to the conversations. Okay. Yeah, so I'll say, hey, you know, before you watch this video, I want you to pay attention for this. Listen, listen for this and watch what I did, and then we'll talk about it. And then we watch, you know, 30, 40 seconds. You say, okay, you see what I did? I asked a question or, you know, or what she said didn't make sense, so she needed to clarify this or whatever, whatever is going on in the video. I just make a comment about it. So you made a comment, John, just a little while ago about you're sensing a softening. Is that like an openness to talk about these things in a more serious way rather than a combative way by other people? Yeah, you know, all I have is my personal experience really to relate this to, but I remember me being an atheist, so I came up in the new atheists, right? That's where I really blossomed and bloomed in my atheism by reading Dennett and Dawkins and Hitchens and watching them. And there was an aggressive kind of anti-religion side to them. I don't see that now. I see, especially among, like when you're talking to college students and younger, young adults maybe, I see an openness that I didn't have. And like I would want to mock you if you were a Christian. Like if you came up to, if I came up to me, I would have just mocked me, you know, and made fun of me. Now I've got people actually wanting to have these conversations in substantive ways. And you can actually see it in the videos when you're talking to, when I'm talking to, like, older, the older generation, I'm met with more, I don't wanna say hostility because nobody's hostile, but more passion, how about that? That's probably the nicest way I could put it. It's more passion. Resistance, passion in resistance, you mean. That's right. But as opposed to when I'm talking to younger people, there's much more open dialogue back and forth going on as opposed to kind of the passion coming out and open resistance. Well, you know, it's interesting, Justin Briarley, who you know, wrote this book called The Remarkable Rebirth of Faith in God, right? Did I get it right that time, Amy? Surprising. Oh my goodness. I'm sorry. I was just having an email conversation with Justin the other day, yesterday. Got to get his title right. The Surprising. There we go. Surprising Rebirth. It's a wonderful book. It's one of the few books, occasionally when I have to do an interview, I can't read the whole book. I've got to kind of read a lot of it enough to get a real good sense of the book and do a credible job at the interview. But then when I'm done with the interview, I put the book out and I go on to the next one, whatever. It's just a liability, a professional liability. But in this one, I went back and I read through the whole thing because it was so good as identifying something happening in the culture. Now he's looking at more of the cognoscente, the upper strata of culture, people that are well-known and famous and players in the world of ideas and stuff like that and how so many people are turning now to theism, particularly Christian theism, because with the death of the new atheist movement, which is what he chronicles there, it's just too dreary. That way of looking at life is too dreary and it doesn't comport with our deepest intuitions about the way the world actually is, something we mentioned earlier in the show. But you're also seeing something happening on the other strata, not just that he's chronicling the upper strata, the cognoscente, as I mentioned, but on the lower strata, just the rank-and-file, especially young people and students. Something is happening there. Yeah. Yeah, it's really great to see. And they're asking great questions. And one of the things I love is they don't want any fluff. They just want the truth, which is easy. So basically what I feel like they're saying is like, just tell me the truth and then let me kind of sort it out. Like, let me wrestle, which is right where I want them. Yeah, sure. Yeah. It does make our job easier and it also shows the, I think, the virtue of being candid and being straightforward and not, you know, trying to sanitize God is one concern that I have in our conversations with people. Sometimes we're just trying to make God look better to them. And at the same time, mischaracterizing what God is like. I mean, there is a hell. And the deal is, and I mentioned this to a number of audiences, hey, at the end, it's either perfect justice or perfect mercy. Either Jesus pays or you pay. That's it. That's the reality, you know. So I've been seeing this too in churches wherever I go, and maybe you've noticed this, have mentioned their youth groups are filling up. This happened even when we were in reality in Philly. The junior high group is just a group that's exploding, the pastor said there. And I think that what happened to Charlie Kirk when he was murdered September 10th of last year, last fall, that was a force multiplier. That just really, not just in a political sense, but spiritually, this just seemed to charge more and more young people up. So have you had any, go ahead. Well, when I had the opportunity to travel to Arizona and go to like the TPUSA, they have a huge America Fest. Yeah. And it was back in December and I got to go. And that was actually one, one of the things that really surprised me because I'm not like too, too engaged, like in the politics of stuff like that. You know that. So I was, I, I had a preconceived notion of what I was going to see there. And one of the things that surprised me is the conversations, the conversations I had with people centered around their Christian worldview, not their political party. And for, for me, that was eye-opening that people are leading in their thought process, young people, their thoughts are being led by their Christian convictions, not a political ideology, which I think is really, really hopeful. By the way, this particular event in December in Arizona, was this the general TPUSA or the, I know there's a Christian version or what, the religious for, what do they call that? The faith? Yeah. The faith version. But this was the regular thing or not just the faith version. It was the regular thing. I went the night, it was a Thursday night event for the faith event, which was just pastors. And it was, it was great too. But then I went to the large, I mean, they had, I think, 35,000 people there. It was, it was unbelievable. I mean, the organization, it's a lot of people, Greg. And, but I, I didn't really sit in any of the talks. I was there to support a friend. And I, I was really surprised and pleasantly so about the quality of the conversations I was having and then the topic I was having with specifically younger people, that they, it wasn't politically motivated. A lot of this stuff was out of their Christian convictions. So even, and I have talked about this on the air before, and I don't think that you can separate, if you're a thoughtful citizen, you can't separate your religious or spiritual convictions, anyone, especially Christians from your political ideas because one should inform the other. If your view is that your religious convictions reflect reality and therefore they're driven by objective moral principles that do have a ramification in how you view policy issues with the government, you know? So, and what you're saying is, and I, I actually think that's the right pecking order, so to speak. What do you think is true? And if you're a Christian, then you're holding to a full range of ideological convictions that inform of necessity how you think the government should use its power. I mean, I don't know how people get away from, get away from that. Have you had any really hard confrontations? Yeah, you know, I, I have hard conversations when I'm talking to people. I talked to a, he introduced them as a father and son, but I'm not sure it was a son. I think it might've been his daughter that was presenting as his son. So like those, those topics are probably more, not, not because the topic is difficult. I don't think the topic is difficult. I just think I, I empathize with people. That's why the suicide stuff is, is so hard for me. So I'm putting myself as I'm talking to this person, I'm putting myself in this father's shoes. And when I hear things like, you know, like, would you rather have a, a transitioned son or a dead daughter, you know, because there's a threat of suicide for the trans community. So manipulative though. Go ahead. I'm sorry. It is so manipulative and so wrong, but my heart breaks for the people, for the people going through it. So those are hard. But as far as like, I mean, I've been called names like

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

Call the Nazi, you know, but like, it doesn't bother me at all. I actually, to that guy, the guy that called me a Nazi, I just, I asked him, I said, Hey, why did you just yell at me a Nazi, call me a Nazi? Why don't you, why don't you just come over and talk, you know, I'd love to chat with you. My name's John, you know, like, you know, because like it's, well, one, it's nearly impossible to get under my skin. I, I'm convicted that Christians, we as Christians, we should be like the least offendable people on the planet because we've got Jesus. And for us, things only get better, you know, and for the rest of the world who don't believe like we do, this is the very best it's going to get for them. So the people I'm talking to are clinging to their ideologies and oftentimes these ideologies are defining who they are. So they, and they have trouble separating those things, like they have trouble separating. This is another thing, and maybe that surprised me, is that people that I talked to who disagree with me, when I'm disagreeing with them, I'm not just disagreeing on an issue, I'm disagreeing with them because it becomes part of, they've knit it to their identity as opposed to you and I, our identity is in Christ. It's not, it's not one issue or the other. Right. Yeah. I could, I can play with stuff up here in the kind of the intellectual ether. But there's something else going on. Even though our identity is in Christ, when people take exception with our Christianity, they are taking exception with our identity. But Christians, well, I mean, I can't speak for everyone, but I think characteristically, and there are exceptions to this, characteristically are not as thin-skinned as the rest with their so-called identity issues. Because, you know, we understand in this world you have tribulation. We expect it. Peter says, why are you surprised at the fiery ordeal that's coming amongst you as if something strange were happening to you? So we can kind of expect it, but I think that there's a certain sense of comfort and stability that we have in Christ that even if people are howling at us, it doesn't feel to me or to you, obviously, and I hope to most Christians, like my house of cards is going to come tumbling down and I have to fight back to save my identity. We're secure. And if people totally disagree with us, well, I mean, especially if they're somebody close to us, that's hard for us, but it doesn't change anything. But for the other side, when you take exception with them, and this is especially true on sexual issues like LGBTQ stuff, and with the T stands for transgender, you deal with those and then people are all up in arms. You are dissing me. You are assaulting my identity. And why does my disagreement with your identity mean so much to you? You know? I think there's an inherent, there's a tell there that something else is going on that they're not entirely comfortable with and they can't stand to hear an alternate voice. I don't know, does that make sense to you? I think it makes perfect sense. And that, it makes sense of, like, intellectually, but also my practical experience when I'm doing this. That seems to be the case. Which, it provides for great conversation, though. I mean, even pointing that stuff out to people is really fun, you know, in the course of a conversation, so much stuff's going on. And if you can maybe just open the curtain just a little bit to one of these many issues, it's fantastic. Why are you getting so mad? Because you're attacking me personally. And are you secure in your own identity? If you are, then why does the fact that I am attacking you personally shake you up so much? I mean, I think those are fair questions to ask, but maybe that will engender a good response. But I also, like, I don't feel like when somebody questions me on a worldview issue, I don't know, per se, pro-life issue, right? When they question the pro-life position, I don't feel personally attacked. And that's, I think, the difference, is I don't feel personally attacked. I think, but when you, if you go to like a, like Women's March, for example, when I'm having conversations with people out on the street about the pro-life issue and they're, and they are staunch, you know, pro-choice. That's their right. That's, they feel personally attacked. Yeah, you're taking their world apart. Yeah. And, well, it's just, that's, and that kind of makes me sad a little bit too, because it's not, there's so much more to the world. Man, I agree. So we just have a minute and a half here to go, maybe. And tell me, what are your plans for the near future? What locations, what are you looking at in terms of places to go to talk to people? What do you have in mind? Yeah, well, certainly more college campuses. I love, I was gonna say I love California. I do actually love California, but I love the public school system here. Well, the weather's a lot better than Boston. Yeah, well, certainly the weather, yeah. But I like, my preferred group to talk to is probably young adults in college. So I'm gonna go to where they hang out. So my goal is, is to hit up some of the, and in California, and this is probably around the country, public state schools I can go to, I've got free access to, so I don't get kicked off. Yeah, as opposed to private schools. Which, yeah, you can't post up at, you know, Pepperdine necessarily or USC or something. You know, I got to go to a, unless I'm invited by a group. And that's something I would love to start doing too, is partnering with maybe Ratio Christi. Yeah. And where they already have traction on a campus. Right. And then they can invite me in and then all of a sudden I have permission. Then you'll find out, yeah, what the Christians are saying in response. That's a whole nother world, isn't it? That is a whole, that is like, that should, I should have said that's what surprised me, actually, because I talked to some Christian students that are, I mean, they're just as relativistic as everybody else. You know, I mentioned to one college student once and I asked him like, hey, do you, do you think Jesus is the only way? And he's saying he's a Christian. And then his response to me, almost verbatim was, well, we got to be careful when we get into these collectivistic ideas. And I'm like, whoa, that's a crazy word to use. Okay. Like, tell me more about that. I don't even know why that would be collectivist. Like we're all in the same group. Pluralism would be collectivist, it strikes me. Anyway, but go ahead. Yeah, well, he's not thinking like that. He's using collectivism as a, he went on to explain that the way that he thought of it was, well, you didn't want to be exclusive. You know, so this exclusivist idea. Yeah, okay. So, and what's really interesting is, I'll ask the students, like, hey, that woman I just talked to over there says that she's a Catholic. Would you be willing to tell her she's wrong? And across the board, everybody I talked to, with the exception of one individual, has said no. And that person was an atheist. Wow. Well, we're out of time, John. What a treat. Had a whole hour together. Thank you. It's called Noise on the Streets. You can find it on YouTube. You can Google it. You can go to our website there at the bottom and there's a link to it. So all the best to you, John. It's great having you on board. Thanks, Greg. Thank you so much. All right, friends. That's it for the show. Greg Koukl here. Give them heaven. All right, friends. Bye-bye now.
