# Interview: Scott Keith – Being Family

- Publication date: 2026-04-22
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/165a7cad-75c5-32ba-86cb-d0f8ee394446`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Hello, friends. Welcome to Stand to Reason. Greg Koukl here. And before I get into our conversation with my guest today, just a final reminder that this is the final weekend for this season's reality. It's in SoCal. We had done that for many years in the fall. Now we're doing it in the spring. So we kind of missed last fall and put it at the end of the schedule. But I just want you to know that we're rocking and rolling. And last I heard, we had about 1,600 signups. We have room for many more. It's going to be a great session. Final session with J. Warner Wallace, by the way. I talked with him the other night, and he's just overwhelmed with new projects and with grandchildren. So he will not be with us as a standard for subsequent sessions. We are thrilled to have had him part of our program for so many years, but this is your last time to see him in this venue. And by the way, he's not doing a lot in other places either. So if it were just for Jim, that would be a good reason to sign up for our Friday night, all day Saturday, Reality Student Apologetics conference. But it's not just Jim. It's Jason Jimenez, and Sean McDowell, and Tripp and Megan Allman, and the rest of the Stand to Reason team. And I will actually be doing a presentation on Friday night on the main stage. I don't get to do that very often. They must increase and I must decrease, is the way this works, but that's okay with me. But anyway, so this is the last weekend. RealityApologetics.com is the place to go if you're within striking distance by car or by plane. Please come down. This is a great conference, the sixth one that we've had this season, obviously. And I sit in the gallery for almost all the sessions, even after five times having seen it, because it's so great. So I don't want you to miss it. RealityApologetics.com is the place to get the information for this weekend, April 24th and 25th for Reality SoCal. My guest today, I've actually had on before, and he had to remind me of that, because I lose track of so many things lately. But he is the executive director of 1517, co-host of the Thinking Fellows podcast, and author of Being Dad, Father as a Picture of God's Grace. And I guess, Scott, that's the last conversation we had on the air, wasn't it? When you did, we talked about that book. Yeah, 10 years ago. Well, welcome back, first of all. And the book we're talking about now is kind of like, I don't know if it's kind of a sequel of sorts. It's called, that was called Being Dad. This is called Being Family, Passing Down the Faith Through the Generations. And I know you're a big part of the 1517 project that I have had some involvement with, thankfully, in the past. First, why don't you tell us just a little bit about that project, Keith? Sure, yeah. 1517 is a Christian ministry. We do a lot of things. Our mission is to declare and defend the good news that you're forgiven and free on account of Christ alone. And so we have both an evangelistic and an apologetic aspect to it. In fact, we just did a small apologetics conference in Texas not too long ago. And, you know, we do a lot of online resources, anything from daily articles to podcast network to YouTube video series, much like you do, to academies, online academies. Sure. And then also in-person conferences. We do a conference every year in San Diego and one in Arkansas. And people can check it out pretty easy. There's a lot of resources up there. It's just 1517.org. We've been doing it for a little over 10 years now and it's steadily growing and enjoying spreading the gospel throughout the world. Well, 1517, of course, celebrating the Reformation and the launch there with Martin Luther, at least more formally with Luther. But my wife and I had the pleasure, really, of being part of that, I think it was two years ago. And Rod Rosenblatt was still there, still, and so was John Montgomery, both of them, you know, with the Lord now. And well done, good and faithful servants in both cases. And Rod, from your book, as I read your book, which, by the way, thank you for it. I enjoyed it immensely. And I was very encouraged by aspects of it, particularly relating to my own family, which is what the book is a lot about. But I know you mentioned Rod a lot, and he's had a big influence in your life, presumably from your dependence on him and quoting of him. He's changed a lot of lives as well. He has. He was the big reason for writing the first book, Being Dad. I always say that when you took a lot of classes from Rod at Concordia Irvine, you kind of got the topic of the class, which might've been theology or apologetics or philosophy or whatever, but you also got about 50% on what it's like and what it looks like to be a good dad. And so, you know, as I was taking notes, a lot of people tuned out during the good dad part, and that's what I really like. So you got to write the book. Yeah. Rod was a regular player, and I've known Rod, or I've known Rod for a long, long time, just from the very beginning days of White Horse Inn because he was a regular there. In fact, I was in studio for the very first broadcast with Kim Riddlebarger and Mike Horton. And I'm not sure if Rod was there, but I think he might've been. It was a small, smallish studio. They jammed all of them in there. And in any event, so it's been nice to know Rod over the years and what a dear man and what a tremendous influence that he's had on so many, especially on the issue of the grace of God and a big... That concept permeates your book, Being Family. The subtitle is passing down the faith through the generations. So why did you write this particular book? You started out with Being Dad, and now you've got an expanded focus here with Being Family. What was your motivation for that, Scott? Well, some of it was just, I mean, you've written books and I'm sure gone out on speaking gigs on them. And as soon as I wrote Being Dad and started doing podcast circuit and speaking gigs, people would automatically ask me sort of like, okay, what's the next step? Are you going to do one that's like being mom and dad? Are you going to do this? None of that ever really resonated with me because I thought at the time, and I still do, that there's a lot that's said on kind of other topics, but fathers need a lot of encouragement because it's so meaningful in the lives of children, both in the secular world and in their faith. But as that time kind of went on, one of the... And I started doing lectures kind of more on masculinity and culture and that type of thing. Some real realities started to hit me. And that's that we've taken a real interesting turn, both societally and in the church, when it comes to like young men's involvement in the secular life in general. In other words, in the civil life in the world and getting jobs, being productive, and then also with young people and their attitudes towards getting married and having children. And we're seeing that impact in the civil world, but it is often clearer in the church, especially in... I'm part of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod, which is a very demographically old group of people. We see that there just because we can kind of vividly see in small churches when there are fewer and fewer young married couples and fewer and fewer children. And the impact of that. And so I just started doing some research on what's the reality here? I mean, again, I'm not giving up anything on the importance of fatherhood in the civil life and in church. But at the same time, what's going on here? Is what I'm seeing real? And it turns out, just even through the secular data, you can gather that, yeah, it's really real. That culminated in me giving a lecture at one of our talks where I said that I wanted all my kids to get married and to get married fairly young. I wanted them to start a family pretty much right after they got married and I wanted them all to live close to my wife and I so that we could be involved in our grandparents and grandchildren's lives. And I was shocked when I got off the stage at how many people were just appalled. Mortified. Mortified that I would put such pressure on my children, that I would have such an expectation. And it just occurred to me that, you know, this was just normal life up until about five minutes ago. Now, if you say something like that, people are scandalized by it, even in the church. And it was weird to me. And so I just kind of did this deep dive on what's happening with marriages, what's happening with the birth rate, what's happening with the work rate with men, what's going on? And so that's kind of what led to this. Well, my parents...

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

were both married when they were 18 years old. And by the time my dad was 25, he had four kids and a fifth one on the way. And actually in his case, he wanted to be a farmer, so we're in northern Wisconsin in an old dilapidated clapboard two-story house. And that thing burned to the ground on Good Friday, 1955, and we all made it out by the skin of our teeth. But then, at 25 years old, 25, with four kids and one soon to come, he had to declare bankruptcy and ship us all back to Chicago and start all over again. And so, but there, I actually thought of my dad quite a bit, and my own family, I was born in 1950, and my own family life, in light of many of the things that you share about family and vocation being expressed in family life and in church life, and certainly with regards to family life, so many of those things were almost as a kid, really, second nature to me. And they are so quaint, if not scandalous, now with this, the way our culture is now. So I want to talk about some of those things. You quote, we mentioned Rod earlier, but you quote Rod Rosenblatt by saying here of the home is the first church, not the best church, not the most polished church, but the first. And that kind of lays a foundation in many ways for your conversation about home, family, church, and vocation. So why don't we use that as just a little springboard to get into your material here, Scott? So yeah, I mean, what Rod is saying there, I've kind of expressed it a little bit differently when people ask me about this, because sometimes I'll run into a lot of people just through my work that are interested in going into the ministry. They want to share the gospel. They maybe want to be an apologist or a missionary or something like that. And one of the ways I've expressed that sort of view of Rod's is by saying, you know, at the end of the day, one of the things you should think about is the importance of becoming a husband or wife and a parent. Because if you want to spread the gospel, the most sort of, the best, most effective, most long-term way you're ever going to do that is with your own family and your own children. Reproduction. Reproduction, right? And word and womb, I think is the way you say it later on in the book. But preaching the gospel and reproducing. Yeah, I mean, you'll be exposed to these people for the rest of your life and you'll get the opportunity to share the gospel with them, to defend it, to them over and over and over and over again. And the impact that you can have in that kind of relationship where it's personal, it's everyday, it's a moment of every day until they're a certain age. It's just amazing. And in that way, it is the first church. And in our world, we'd say that the church is that place where the gospel is preached and the sacraments are rightly administered. Well, not a lot of sacramental action often going on in the home, but that is the place where the gospel is preached. They break bread on occasion. Yeah, they do. And if you, having read the book, you'll know that I think that also forgiving one another's sins is part of that. And we're jumping around. You've got whole sections on this, but jumping around just a little since we're on this topic. I think that, let me, for a moment of transparency here, I have two children, a 21-year-old and an 18-year-old. I started kind of late. I had the first at 54 and the second at 57, and they're both adopted. But I had all these ideas about how best to, in a certain sense, make our home a spiritual home with certain spiritual exercises. And one of those was having, I don't know, for lack of a better term, devotions or time where we get together. And I'm just saying, for transparency's sake, that never worked out for us. And it was like, honest to goodness, whenever I would try to do this, it was like every demon in the county would be sitting all around the living room and every distraction you could possibly imagine. I just, it was so frustrating, and I just was not in the kind of spiritual mood after all of those distractions to, anyway, but part of what you point out, and this is what I'd like you to say something about, is that having the home as the first church isn't just about doing explicitly spiritual things. Organic. Yes, it's not, doesn't mean not to do those, but it's much broader, organic. So tell us a little bit about that. Yeah, well, I mean, what you're, I think what you're describing is what Rod says when he says it's not the best church, right? So when you, when you go to church, there's a whole setup for it. You leave your house, you go there, there's a system that happens, you know, no matter what kind of church you go to, it kind of happens the same-ish way every Sunday. A churchy of sorts for everybody. And you're used to it, and the pastor knows what his job is, and everybody else that works there knows what their job is, and they do it. And that's the thing. When you're at home, it's not like that. And that's why oftentimes kind of setting up, trying to mimic what the church does, how the church does, doesn't work as well very often because, you know, everything gets, every demon gets in the way, like you said. I like the way you said that. You're tired, you had a bad day at work, you know, some, there's soccer practice this, that you wanted to do. Something came up. And at the end of the day, what I'm arguing for is just this, there's an organic nature to this where you and the church kind of, I guess I would say, work hand in hand. And it's not that you hand over all those official functions to the church, but in the home, you're open and willing to have sort of those more organic conversations when they come up. The forgiveness of sins comes in the moment of the sin. Frequently. Yeah, frequently. And not as a planned event. You know, well, we'll deal with, we'll deal with this sin of yours at six o'clock when we have our devotions together as a family. You don't happen in the moment and in the time. You're in the car waiting for soccer practice to start, and all of a sudden a question comes up about something, you know, that they were talking to their friends about regarding Christianity or something like that, and you answer that question. You have the willingness, and I'd even say to some, which is why the type of thing that you do is really important, that everybody needs to have, you know, some ability to answer some of these questions, especially as a parent. It doesn't mean that you need to be an expert, but to be able to, in those moments, express your faith, say why you believe what you do believe, and, you know, how you got there. And this is the type of sort of rawness that in your children, I think, leads to them knowing not just that you want them to be a Christian, but that they are, that you are Christian, that they are Christian, and that this is a Christian home, and this is just kind of how we live. This is our everyday motions of life kind of express themselves this way. I love the, I always say that when I was younger and we were using the NIV a lot, I didn't really love the translation of Ephesians 2.10, to do good works, which God has prepared in advance for you to do. But the ESV kind of has that nailed now, I think, because it says, to do good works, which God has prepared in advance for you to walk in. Because it's just such a good description of how the life and faith works. You just kind of roll out of bed in the morning and you start living your life and the way in which and you interact with other people in your various vocations as husband or wife, father, worker, student, whatever. You're just walking around doing these things. That is your Christian vocation, and that is the Christian life. And those are the things he prepared for you to walk in. Now, you just, I think, kind of introduced a concept here that's really central to your work, and it's the word vocation, but you use it in two different senses there. On the one hand, you were talking about vocation and what many people would think about it. Here's what I do for a living kind of thing, or here's how my time is occupied, for example, for homemakers. That's my vocation. And I love the way, and maybe we'll get a little bit into this later, the way you develop the nobility of that concept. But you also use the word vocation in a much broader theological sense here. And since so much of your book trades on this theological notion and applies it to different areas of family and church life, tell us a little bit about how you are using the word vocation in that sense. Yeah, so in the way you caught onto it, I would say that no one ever has just a single vocation. So your profession may be that you're a plumber, an electrician, or a CPA, or whatever. And you can rightly say, my vocation is I'm a plumber or electrician or a CPA or whatever. But if you stop and think about it, that's not the only thing that you know, especially as a Christian, that you're called to do, right? Even if you're not married, you're somebody's child,

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

Because I talk about my concern about the way people use the word calling. I'm not concerned about the way you're using it, but I just want to clarify for our listeners. What you're talking about is the role, responsibility that Christians have, scripture identifies in our life, not some peculiar communication from God about a specific thing that God wants that individual to be involved in. That's a good catch. Thank you. I mean, I'm not looking for you to hear God's voice and say, you are supposed to be this. What you're doing is you're seeing, and kind of what I lay out in the first part of the book, is that God calls you into these certain things, and that includes meaningful work in the world, especially if you're a man, to be married and to have children whenever possible. And this is kind of the first blessings that he gives to Adam and Eve. And that's because this is how we serve one another. I often use the illustration of, when I'm doing this for high schoolers, explaining vocation of praying the Lord's Prayer. And when we describe that, we say, when you get to the fourth petition, that's give us this day our daily bread. I'll say things like, when you pray that, are you actually expecting God to answer that prayer? In other words, when you say, Lord, today feed me, do you ever wonder whether or not he's saying yes or no to that? And if you think he's saying yes to that, how do you think it happens? Do you think that when you pray to God to feed you and he says yes, that you're kind of like the Israelites wandering in the wilderness and you step out your tent door and trip over some manna? Or is he going to do it some other sort of indirect way through a means other people? That's usually the answer. Well, then that brings in the vocations of farmers and ranchers and harvesters and distributors and truck drivers and people that load and offload things and grocers store it and people at restaurants that fix it and then people at restaurants that serve it to you and the people at home that fix it and serve it call mom and dad usually. And that these are all vocations that God uses when you say, feed me today. And he says, okay. And you can even take the illustration of like one aspect of that. Say like a truck driver and how many truck drivers, you know, if you're in orange County, how many truck drivers have to come into orange County today with truckloads full of food in order for God to answer the prayer. Yes, I'll feed you today. And it's something like a line of semi trucks, two miles long every day, just in that one vocation. If they can afford the fuel here in Southern Cal, I saw it at what's almost $7 a gallon in Malibu at coast highway this morning. But anyway, I digress, but we still need fuel makers, you know, to fuel the truck. That's part of the supply chain. So to speak. But one of the things that I also really appreciate, and this is thematic as you're touching on a number of specific topics in your book, um, that, that is vocation. That is our, our, our spiritual lives are lived out in, I think you refer to it as the daily grind of life. And you say your daily grind isn't a distraction from the Christian life. And by the way, it's very easy to think this way if we have, are tempted to think in terms of secular and secular and sacred. Okay, we got the secular stuff, but I can't do the sacred stuff because I'm too busy doing the secular stuff. And maybe I'll get a little sacred here or there, but your point is there in the Christian life, there isn't that kind of distinction. Uh, it's, it's the Christian life. It's messy. It's hidden and it's remarkable in the eyes of the world is what you say. Talk about this concept of, uh, love in the ordinary is another way that you put it in your book. Yeah. I mean, this is the reality again, that, um, as Christians, we're often looking for like whatever special way we can say thank you to God for our salvation. Right. And I, one of the ways I illustrate this and you would know this too, is that when you sort of have been in conversations with somebody who's not a Christian for a while and you know, through the work of the Holy Spirit and him working through you through these conversations and the sharing of the word, they come to the faith. One of the, and they're, they're usually pretty, this is not like a, an emotionless moment ever when somebody actually comes to the faith. It's usually a pretty overwhelming thing, especially in the moment, even if it's taken months or years or whatever. Well, I became a Christian during the Jesus movement and there was a whole lot of that going on too. I understand perfectly what you mean, but that's even now. That's true. It's definitely true. Yeah. I mean, even if it's, even if it's through very like sort of reasonable apologetic conversations and the sharing of the word, when finally somebody finally realizes that Christ died and rose for them personally and that they believe in that and that they now have everlasting life with him forever. It's, you know, this is a miracle that's happened and they usually have just like a couple things going on. And one of the things they often kind of ask in some word is, okay, that's great. What can I now do for God? And you know, the Christian has to be pretty honest, like when they're answering that saying, you know, we're talking about the almighty creator of heaven and earth. We're talking about the guy that spoke in the universe came into existence. He spoke and there was plants and animals and you know, and all these things. And he, he doesn't, he personally doesn't need you to do anything for him. One, because he gave you everything that you had. And two, he doesn't need everything, anything that you had. He already gave it to you. And that can be a little deflating. And then you, but then you come along and you say, but this is how the Christian life is worked out. And this is actually how we serve God. He has put other people into your life and those other people need you and you need them. Um, they need you for certain physical needs. They often need you for certain emotional needs, um, and spiritual needs. And when you sort of in the daily grind of life are there for them in the way that you're called to be as father or mother or child or grandmother or grandfather and uncle or whatever friend, um, that you are doing something that's holy in sort of this mixed up world. Um, Luther uses the example of a mother changing a diaper, he says is a thousand times more righteous than a thousand monks doing holy orders for a thousand years. Like one mother changing one diaper because that, that is done freely in love. And the benefit for the Christian is, is that you now do these things, not because it's a matter of the law. And you think that if I don't serve my neighbor, God's going to punish me. You do these now because you're free in Christ. Because he says you're free in Christ. Now you are, you are free. You're servant to none. Now I, now I'm calling you to be, to go out and to be a free, dutiful servant of all and serve them. And this mixes up for us in daily life. It'll sometimes be real physical stuff like down and dirty changing diapers, um, making meals, and it'll sometimes be a little more heady conversations and it'll sometimes just be a hugs and I love you and you're forgiven. So I, I, I'm not sure if you're familiar with Christian Smith and his work. Um, he's from Notre Dame, I think, but he wrote a book back in the mid two thousands about, um, young people and uh, what was it? uh, therapeutic deism or something like he come up with that phrase about what is it called? What is it? Moral therapeutic deism. Yeah. And like a lot of Christian young people were just living a full, turned out to be a very religious life that was with no depth of spiritual depth and no spiritual life. But, but he, he then did an analysis of family. You might've come across this in your research. And he said, um, one of the most, um, prominent determinants of whether a child is going to follow the Christian faith of their parents is how consistently their parents live their own faith out in the day to day. Not sermonizing, not devotional times, not, but just, are they authentic Christians in a way that's visible to their children? And he said that the math is, it's almost deterministic. It's like something like 87%. I don't know, it's way up there. It's so powerful, the influence of this, how did you put it? Uh, love in the ordinary that happens on a family basis. Mothers and fathers living out that particular vocation in the lives of their children. I, I totally believe that. And at the end of the day, I'd say you need to then be very cognizant of what you're communicating Christianity is. Um, if you're communicating to your children that Christianity is this moral system, um, that we sort of achieve at the end of the day, we have Jesus and we add this moral system that we sort of achieve. And you say that as a parent and your job is then to live that out consistently. I'd say, uh, be careful because at the end of the day, saved, we're all saved, but we're all still here, uh, sinners, um, waiting for the, the hope of the resurrection of the dead, the life of the world to come, the perfection of not only, you know, our justification, but our actual sanctification in our new bodies and souls too

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

You're still gonna sin against your children. You're still gonna get angry at them when you ought not and all of these things. And so the communication needs to be that I'm a forgiven sinner. We go to church every Sunday and we go to hear that we are forgiven. We go to hear the pronouncement that we're forgiven in Christ to be reminded of that, to be sort of re-enfaced by the power of the Holy Spirit when that's preached to us. But the measure of whether or not I'm a Christian or not is not, you know, just am I still naughty or not? Just, I'd say I agree with that, but just kind of be careful. Christianity's core message is that Christ died for you and that faith in that is what means eternal life. That's the message. And that forgiveness is given between each other. That's how God spreads it through the world. And that's how he gives it from one sinner's mouth to another sinner's ear. That's consistency. I'd say you would have to be careful this year, sort of like talking about all this forgiveness and you kind of never have any forgiveness for your children. I'd say watch out for that one. Yeah, I'll say, and I mean, not to weigh my own flag, but I just was very, very conscious of this considering my own family of origin where this particular feature was not in play, how I thought about how important it was for me when it was appropriate, either with the content or the way I communicated the content, that I needed to apologize to my children or to my wife. You know, and sometimes I told my kids, you know what, I stand by my point, but I didn't express it properly. I was not, I need to, I'm sorry for that. I apologize. And that has created a, at least in me personally, I'm hoping that this is something my children are learning from by example, but it actually made changes in me, Scott, on how I am as a dad, just my whole temperament with being willing to face my own failures. Maybe I just didn't want to fail as much as I used to, so it helped teach me in that way, but I suspect that needs to, there are probably dads listening to me right now that need to hear that and need to practice it. Yeah, I'd say, I don't, it's so funny when you do this kind of thing, Rod always said, hey, be careful about giving advice, do this for life. Well, should you take that advice from Rod? Well, we'll think about that. Yeah, I got it. Half your lectures were advice. No, that's fine. But I, I, I tell dads when I do this in men's groups a lot, be willing to lay yourself bare to your children. Like, because at the end of the day, if you want somebody, if you want to experience like raw forgiveness for having sinned, you know, maybe go to your spouse. Maybe your spouse is good at this, but your kids, you're gonna be good at this. Like your kids are gonna, absolution is gonna be natural to them in a way that the more you grow up, it's not as natural. I mean, I struggle with it with my wife still. I mean, I'm sure you do too. It's like even when she comes and says she's sorry for doing something, I'm usually so still worked up that it's, it's hard for me to get out the words. I try to, but kids are really good at this. I mean, I have memories of apologizing to my older son where he just, would just lay me bare with the words of Jesus, you know, like told, and it's amazing. Yeah, that's sweet. I tell people to practice that because at the end of the day, that's how you live authentically as a Christian to your children. Yes, I agree. So you mentioned three different basic callings that you pursue in your book here. We've been kind of working through some of them a little bit. I wanna talk a little more precisely about some of them. You identify worker and spouse and parent. And I just absolutely loved when you talk about work and the nobility of work and work was before the fall. It was strife and toil that came after the fall, but work. And it's just part of my observation about what the culture has done with the created order is it's male and female. He created them, be fruitful and multiply and subdue. And there are a whole bunch of stuff in there and like binary sexuality, husband, wife stuff, you know, and of course this comes in chapter two more. man leaves his mother, father, cleaves to his wife, the two become one flesh. But the command and that was all before the fall. The command has been to be fruitful and multiply and the, I just, it's amazing to me the momentum against work and the nobility of labor that's in our culture. And of course, probably there's political reasons, policy reasons that have created this over the years, but in any event, it is a problem in the church and you, I'll just read, I'll just recite what you wrote and I want you to respond. Able-bodied, mentally capable Christian men ought to be working full-time. I read that and I thought, no doubt, why is that controversial? Then you write, work isn't punishment, it's purpose. Work is not the curse. So what a refreshing thing to hear someone say, go to work, men. Men, go to work. And the reason it needed to be said to men, one is, I always say that that's when God gave that in the garden before the fall, he gave that specifically to Adam. And I kind of always give the caveat. This does not mean that women can't work or at times even shouldn't work. But what it means is that there is a specific word that God gave to Adam in the garden and that's that you need some purpose here. And so let me give you a purpose and he gives it to him and it's as a blessing. And in the modern world, young men are not seeking work. I don't know if it's a, I mean, there's a lot of studies on what has happened in schools and the education system and how it's been failing boys for years. And we're now kind of reaping that. But I remember when I got to Concordia Irvine and I was teaching there and I found out that even, that was more than a decade ago, that 70% of the enrollees were female and 30% were male. And I thought, this is not speak well of the workforce. And I'm not a guy that thinks everybody needs to go to college. Two out of three of my children didn't, but it is a signifier of what's going to happen in the workplace. And it turns out it was. We're at about, you know, you were at about 62% female going into the workforce, men making up the rest, but working at a much lower rate. One of the statistics from one of the books I read said he kind of alluded to the fact that if we were back to sort of a workforce that was mostly men, you'd see unemployment rates like the great depression. And what props up our work, our current work rate now and our current employment rate is the fact that so many women are in the workforce. And that creates another concern for the things you write about. Yeah. So, but able-bodied men who can are called to have work as a blessing to be useful and to have purpose. A man that, and this is all law, but I've had to say this to my own children. You know, a man with a job is always a better man. You know, since my daughters are young, you know, I'm thinking about now the male interests in their lives and stuff. And one of my daughters reported that she went out to dinner with a young man and he paid the bill. He paid the bill. That impressed her because it seems like it is not standard anymore. And that drives me nuts. Well, when it's not standard for them to have a job, it's not gonna be standard to pay the bill. Yeah. Well, in this case, he did. And so, I mean, that, but he could step up. And, you know, I want my daughters to marry men, not boys. And a man, you know, they say, Scott, that, you know, kids grow up so fast these days. I do not think that's true. I think kids don't grow up hardly at all. What we see happening, and this is what people are reflecting on, is kids get adult privileges without the adult responsibilities. I totally agree. And that corrupts them. And as my daughters speak, you know, are connecting with young men, I want them to take responsibility, be men, protect my girls, do what they need to do as grown-ups. And if they're not grown-ups, I don't want my girls to have anything to do with them, you know? Now, obviously, I can't control that entirely. Both my daughters are adults, technically. And I didn't mean that as a disparagement of my daughters. They're fine. But they get to a point where, you know, okay, now they're taking responsibility for things in life and you can't tell them everything to do. They're not under your authority in the same way. This is felt. Like we were, so my eighth grandchild was baptized this past Sunday.

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

And some of our friends came up and they have a daughter who's almost 20, I think. And my friend was holding the baby after the baptism. And she goes, look at my dad. He just always wants to hold babies. I'm like, yeah, well, he probably wants one from you and your sisters. And I go, when are you going to get started? And she goes, you know, I'm the youngest. We went through this. And she goes, but she goes, you know what, though, Scott? At the end of the day, if you could show me a man that was worth the time of getting married to. That is so sad. You know, I'm sorry. I have seen that so much. And I didn't get married till I was late. I mean, my 48th birthday on my honeymoon. But that was not because I wasn't launched and looking hard. It was just a matter of circumstances that were beyond my control. But nevertheless, there just seemed to be so much frustration with young, fully eligible, fine Christian ladies who can't find a grown-up Christian man to show appropriate interest in them. It really makes me angry when I see that. Really frustrating. And it's having a huge influence, not just on society, but on the church, too. You have a few places to be concerned. Well, this brings me, in chapter 4, you have vocation of Christian marriage. And you write there that marriage is a workshop for sinners learning to live together under grace. Now, I've been married 27 years. And truer words were never written. You know, but that reflects a different understanding or perspective on vocation of marriage than the modern mentality as a book that I read. I highly recommend it. You might be familiar with it. I can't think of the author right now, but the title is, I think it's called Sacred Love, but the subtitle is Maybe God Meant for Marriage Not to Make Us Happy, but to Make Us Holy. Oh, there you go. And that's really captured in your comment there. And so, I mean, just the idea that marriage is the place where our Christian life gets formed as adults, almost more than anything else, it seems to me. Yeah, and it's when, I mean, marriage rates are very low. They're lower than they've been since we've been looking at marriage rates. And it's, this is, you know, sometimes they'll dip down during, you know, when really bad things are happening, but they're just lower now than they have been since they've been measured. And when people are asked, they'll say things like, you know, I'm not ready or I'm not, I haven't done enough things or this isn't set up. I haven't lived my life. And the funny thing is, is that when you go around and talk to young people about this and even responsible young people that are just good Christians, even, they're worried that they're not going to be ready in some way. Like they don't have enough money or this, that, or the other. They don't know how to take care of somebody else. There is no such thing. Yeah, well, one of the reasons I wrote that line, you need to know that this just, that's not real. Like you could, you could have 800 things more set up than I did when I got married at 21 or 22. And you are still going to have to go through all of the stuff that Joy and I have gone through to figure out how to be husband and wife together and how to make it these 32 years or whatever it is since we got married. Because it is, it is the most beautiful blessing on the planet and it is hard and it's not supposed to be any other way. Right? My doctor father used to say a little more graphically. He'd say, marriage is two sinners living belly to belly naked together forever. Like he goes, can you imagine the friction? I'm like, yeah. At the end of the day, you know? The optics are interesting, but I want to read a paragraph that you wrote. It's actually three sentences, but that, and I say this so you can comment on it, but it's along the same line that you're discussing right now. And I say this because I think there are a lot of married people out there that need to hear this. Okay, you're right. You don't fail at marriage by suffering. You don't fail by struggling. You don't fail because the person you're married turned out to be someone different from what you expected. You don't fail because you couldn't fit the broken, fix, rather, the brokenness. You fail only when you refuse to forgive or to be forgiven. And even then, hear this, even then, Jesus isn't done with you. I love that, that transparency and sense of reality in light of people's expectations, unfortunately, of what good marriage is supposed to look like and feel like, as if it's painless. Yeah, as if, I remember when I was a kid, the movie Irreconcilable Differences came out. And it was because this had become a law. All of a sudden that you could get divorced all of a sudden just by saying, well, we don't get along. You used to take a trial. When I was a kid, you used to take a trial. A judge and a court. And with the divorce rates go through the roof because all of a sudden you can say, I quit just because we don't get along as well as I thought we were going to. And that's kind of what that's against. It's like, do you think that my wife and I don't have irreconcilable differences? We do, right? We do. But that's not the measure. The measure is whether or not we stick it out in those differences and whether or not we forgive for those differences. And even when we fail to, Christ's forgiveness is there for us. You know, not just forgiveness, but reminding us of the forgiveness that he would love us to share with one another. Well, Scott, sometimes I think about it like this, and I've mentioned this. I probably mentioned on the show before, but it serves as a guideline for me. And that is, keep your vows. But then people, here's what they think. They think, oh, I've got to stay in this forever. No, that's not what I mean. That's just one part of your vow. What did you say to have and to hold and to love and to cherish in sickness and in health for better or worse until death do you part? Forsaking all others. I left that one. Okay, well, I'm not just saying until death do you part. Do all of those other things that you promised you would do. And if people start doing that unilaterally, not just if the other person is willing to do it too, but unilaterally because your side of the promise was unilateral, that's going to make a huge difference, it seems to me. Well, the have and the hold, I think, come. I mean, the people who put together those liturgies so long ago were probably pretty smart. To have and to hold come first because you can have and hold without feeling the love in the moment. But one of the things that the having and holding will produce inevitably is love. And so that goes directionally that way because there's a reality that if you think that marriage is just going to be sort of this emotion of love all the time, you're setting yourself up for an unrealistic expectation that will really disappoint you. What it is, is it's a life together. And a life together means all sorts of things. And that's why you do have and hold. You have ups and downs and traumatic things and wonderful things. I told one of my sons recently that, you know, you're kind of, there's, in a marriage, there's maybe like 5% of the time where you're really angry and maybe like 10% of the time where you're really happy. And all the other time is just the time in the middle where you just live in your life together. You're having and holding together. Yeah, the ordinary, as you put it earlier. Yeah, well, this brings me to another point here about, um, that you already made reference to and maybe you have some more to say about it. And what you've, you've talked about how, and I think there's certainly an impulse to responsibility that drives this, that drives this, this ethic now. Um, but, okay, I want to be able to support my wife. I want to be able to have this in order and that in order. And we want to, you know, we don't want to do something foolish and, and capricious and then cause problems for our family and our everything. So wait is the antidote there. But what you said is that, you know, maybe instead of pushing marriage to the back of the line, after all these other things are done, uh, what if we told our young people to think about it first, not last. Talk about that a little bit more because there are real concerns here that people have about finances and stuff, especially in the current economy, whatever. And I'm not sure how much, let me pause before you answer. When I was talking about where I lived when I was 10 years old, that was 1960. My wife, this was last night, my wife said, well, did your mom have a car? And I said, of course not. What do you mean? Nobody, nobody, two car families. That didn't exist. It's certainly not in the middle class. And I was middle class, maybe a little lower middle class. But in any event, um, but nevertheless, even in that environment where, you know, it wasn't like everybody's working and you got two degrees and whatever. Um, like I said, my parents got married when they were 18.

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

So talk about that, considering it first rather than last. Yeah, one of the, when people say, why do you write this book, one of the things I'll say kind of on an elevator speech-wise is because I want, we do a pretty good job, as responsible parents do a pretty good job of telling their kids to do well in school, to go to college, to get good grades, to get a good job, to get the internship, whatever. We do a pretty good job at that. And it turns out when you sort of raise them with all those expectations, they kind of do, right, on the whole. And then you look at what God said for us in the first couple chapters of Genesis that he wants, you know, men to get a job, that he wants both to get married and to have children and populate the earth and subdue it. And even as Christians, we don't even often even ever say that stuff explicitly at all. And so what I love that you moved that, God's blessings for us, to the front of the line and then talk about school and jobs and bank accounts and financial responsibility and everything. Yeah, I'd love that you move it to the front of the line, but the more I talk on this, the more I just like it to make it in the mix somewhere. Like, just say it somewhere. If you want to do school and everything first, I guess that's fine, but can you put it in the mix? If I'm right and on the whole, when you're a good, responsible parent, your kids kind of do listen and they do, for the most part, do what you say is important. If God says this is important, maybe we as Christian parents should say this stuff too. And I'd love for you to say it first and to put a higher priority on it than all the secular stuff. I would. But at this point, I'd love for you just to put it in the mix because the church needs it, your children need it, and society needs it. I was just going to say, without working men, without stable marriages, and without children, even civilly, societally, we're in a heap of trouble, let alone in the church. So I had a conversation yesterday with a friend of the family. I think she's probably late 20s now. She has a bachelor's degree in German and Bible that she got in Germany, as it turned out. She went to St. Andrews in Scotland to get a master's degree in New Testament or something. And now she's married and she has a child. Actually, they got pregnant like two or three months after they were married. I'm Zooming with her, right? I see her face. I know this gal. She is absolutely glowing. And she said, being a mother, I'm sorry, being a wife and being a mother is the best job in the whole world. And I said, shout it from the rooftops. Yeah. One of the things that you'll see sometimes on, because people send me all these things now, you see on YouTube is women holding their new babies and saying, I wish somebody would have told me. Yeah. Earlier. Yeah. Well, we don't say it. And my encouragement in here, one of the big, especially the first three or four chapters of the book, is just encouragement to just tell your kids, tell them these things. With this book, I'm really trying to get gigs with high school groups. I mean, I just did it in Finland with like 350 high schoolers. To get gigs with high school groups, because that's the age group that needs to hear this. I would really love like new parents just raising their kids to hear this and high schoolers thinking about what they're going to do next to hear. That's why I think what you've written here in being family, passing down the faith through the generations is so helpful. On this particular topic, I want to read a statistic from on being, this is, well, this is on motherhood, which we've been talking on. All right. Okay. Here it is. Read them and weep, right? According to the American College of OBGYNs, women are most fertile in their late teens to late twenties. By age 30, fertility begins to decline gradually. And watch this, by 35, that decline becomes much steeper. And by 40, this is the part that stunned me when I read it. The chances of natural conception in any given month are less than 5%. That's like, oh my goodness. But this is exactly what's happened. They're waiting till they're 40 to even think about this because they got careers and stuff. And all of a sudden, maybe they're holding somebody else's child and they're saying, my opportunity is gone and nobody told me. So we're telling them right now. To this day, when high school girls are surveyed and asked how many kids, well, it's changing a little bit, but up until like five minutes ago and asked how many kids do you want to have? The answer was for years and years and years, back to the 50s, three. Um, what's happened and that played out for a long time where the average number of kids was like 2.6, 2.7, something like that. Um, played out for a long time. The answer is basically the same now or was with this generation of moms now when they were in high school, they would have said three, but everything gets pumped along the way, right? It gets put off, gets put off, gets put off, gets put off. And by the time they do start having kids, they're 30, 31, 32, 33. And not only is it harder for them to get pregnant and have kids, but the time available is shorter too. And so it's much harder to ever hit that goal that they said they want. Yes. Yeah. And we ended up now with like a 1.8. Look at even adopting children is hard. We're almost out of time here. I want to throw this out though, because when both of our children, um, we adopted from the United States and people thought that that was really strange because most are adopting from overseas. I say, why do you think that's so? Because it's less expensive. No, it's more expensive to go overseas. Well, then why? It's because so many children in this country are being aborted. There aren't enough children to go around for the couples who haven't been able to conceive many because of this problem we're talking about. Delay, delay, delay. The world's concept of success, you know, break through the glass ceiling and all that. And so there's, they, they can't have their own children and they can't adopt here. They got to go overseas. So, um, I got like the 45 seconds. I just want to spend that time, Scott, to say thank you so much. Your book was excellent to read. I hope lots of people get it being family, Scott Keith, and it's available on Amazon. I checked there yesterday along with being dad. So, uh, you can couple them up and, uh, and read them. There's so much practical stuff in here for you as you're developing your own and living out your own vocations as human beings in Christ, living out the richness of life with God in the ordinary things of life, which are marriage and work and family and child rearing and everything like that. So, um, Scott, thank you so much for your contribution with this book and your other work and 1517. Keep up the good work. Okay, buddy. Thank you. All the best to you. All right, friends, that's the end of our show. Thank you for joining us. The book again, being family, definitely worth reading. It will shake your world a little bit in a good way. It's got a gentle touch, but very, very sound in the challenges he offers. Uh, Greg Kokel here for stand to reason. Give them heaven. Bye-bye now.
