# A Response to the Rising Antisemitism

- Publication date: 2026-04-15
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/24c697ea-06e1-3324-bbac-67b3390f011c`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

All right, friends, Greg Koukl here on Stand to Reason, and I am glad you're with me because I want to talk about something that I don't want to talk about. And I have Amy Hall here with me because I trust her contribution to this conversation. Something is happening that I never thought I would ever see take place anywhere in the world, but especially here in the United States of America. And it started on the fringe, and it should have stayed there. But the power of social media has been a kind of force multiplier regarding this that has made a very ugly thing look noble. I am talking about Jew hatred. And this is coming not just from like Middle Eastern types, which you kind of expect that over the years with all the conflict in the Middle East and for, I mean, not just for years, but for decades, really. Not just from radical Muslims, and not all Muslims share that hostility towards Judaism, but many do. But I'm not talking about that. More and more, I'm talking about this kind of, I'm even digging for the right language here to describe this thing that's been happening. I just called it Jew hatred because that's what I think it is. More and more, I see that coming from self-proclaimed Christians. And the animosity is just really hard for me to even countenance. Amy, you sent me some stuff, and you're the first one really who, you know, brought this to my attention. I know there's things going on with fringe folk, and some of these are major league kind of secular style podcasters, influencers, whatever. And many people can probably think of the individuals that I have in mind too in particular, but it's not a personality thing. I just figure that's kind of crazy. They're on the fringe, squawk, squawk, squawk. They have a lot of people listening to them, but I think a lot of people were listening because they were so crazy sounding, and they were just getting entertained. But now it's happening more and more in our circles from people that you've said, Amy, are Christian influencers, have a following. I have two pieces I'm going to read from X posted by a Michael Spangler and a Stuart DiNeno. And do you know anything about their background, Amy? No, I don't know anything about those two specifically. I'm actually pretty shocked myself because I had heard statements every once in a while. I'll hear people I follow will call them out. And so I knew it was going on, but what I didn't know is that it's having a big influence on the youth. And I assumed it was just a fringe thing, like you said, but then it turns out I got a message from a friend of mine who said that her students, her son and her students, the students that are around her son, they withstood all of the LGBT stuff, all of the woke stuff, all these things. They were ready for, they had been prepared for, they were responding too well. But this had just sneaked in through the back door. Nobody was guarding it. And what's happened is that these young conservative men have been targeted by algorithms on social media and just fed this constant barrage. Yes. And I did not realize that it had gone this far, and they had started asking her questions and making objections that she was like, where is this coming from and how did this happen? And what happens is we weren't ready for this. We did not think it was happening to people that were solid, you know, solid in a lot of ways. But what happens is these influencers, they start with kind of gateway questions like, oh, but we don't have to, you're just saying I have to agree with Israel every time. That's not, that's not right. And I mean, that's a reasonable thing to say. No, of course, you don't have to agree with everything they do. Of course, of course. You must be a reasonable person. But then they move it and they move it and they move it. And slowly but surely, these kids are absorbing these ideas. And it's very disturbing, very disturbing. So I have these two posts just to give you an example of some kind of craziness. And the listener's name you gave me these, Michael Spangler. You said he's got some kind of a following. I'm not sure about, I mean, I'm sure that guy does. That's why it popped up. But I don't know about him specifically. All right. Well, here's what he posted on X. Pardon me. One of the most subversive books around. Okay, I'm just going to pause there on this one. Gee, what, what could that be? This is a Christian. And he's saying this is one of the most subversive books around. The Hiding Place by Corrie ten Boom. It celebrates shielding Christ's enemies from, who does she shield, by the way? The Jews. Okay. Shielding Christ's enemies, the Jews, from the political consequences of their evil. Promotes lying to do so. Glorifies resistance to just government. By the way, who is, what is the just government? That's the Third Reich. And co-belligerence with communism. You know, they're making, he's made common cause with communists is the claim. So paints the just consequences for these actions as persecution. Now Corrie ten Boom spent a number of years in a Nazi concentration camp. And if anybody read her story in Hiding Place or The Watchmaker's Daughter, another book about that, I've read them both. You know how badly she suffered. But this is mockingly dismissing it. Oh, that's persecution. She got, she deserved what she got is the idea. And does so all in the name of white Protestant Christianity. Two dozen copies are available at your local Christian homeschool bookstore. Ministers cite it in the pulpit as something well-known and beloved. The rot is very deep. Now I would never read this to you, friends, for the shock impact. Like, who's Michael Spangler? Oh, nobody, who's that? Nobody knows. I'm not going to just pick some solitary voice out just for effect. I'm reading this because this is a characteristic of an approach that so many people are being sucked into. And this one so badly that he can characterize Corrie ten Boom as some kind of moral monster because she was protecting Christ's enemies, the Jews, from the just government that was exterminating them. That's, that's the rot that's very deep. Here's another one, Stuart DiNeno from X also. I don't know who this guy is, but he makes the same, reflects also on Corrie ten Boom. I suspect, he writes, that Corrie ten Boom is a counterfeit Christian heroine. But why would anybody say she's a counterfeit Christian? Because she protected Jews. If she was hiding Jews from the Germans, you can bet she was protecting communists because Jews were heavily involved in all the European communist movements and were strongly anti-fascist. Wait, okay. She's protecting Jews. That doesn't mean she's Jewish. If she's protecting communists, it doesn't mean she's communist. I bet you, because gays were also persecuted by the Third Reich, they had their own, what, color thing they wore, like the Jews had their Star of David, the yellow Star of David stitched to their stuff. Gays had the thing. Does that mean if she's protecting gays from the persecution of the right that she's maybe a closet lesbian? I mean, this kind of thinking is nutty. Anyway, it's very likely she was a communist herself and she was very involved with the Dutch resistance network, which had largely been organized by communists. So what? You know, the enemy of my enemy is my friend lots of times. And, you know, pro-lifers make common cause with atheists that are pro-life too. That doesn't mean they are in favor of atheism. It's nutty thinking. But what really amazes me is that this...

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

idea is beginning to take root in the minds of young people, and you brought it to my attention because it's not just a one-off, so to speak. And we have parents that are reflecting on their children. I was actually looking for the quote. I think we have it here somewhere. Maybe we'll find it where the mom wrote and said, you know, this is happening and it's surprising, especially with younger Gen Z males, of all people. One other thought before I want you to give some more input here. Oh, here it is, the quote. You're probably aware that anti-Semitism is absolutely rampant in Gen Z. She writes, Gen Z conservatives, especially boys. My son is surrounded by them. He told me one of the biggest questions is the synagogue of Satan smear, and we'll get to that and some other challenges that are brought up. And if you can only worship the Father through the Son and the Jews reject the Son, who are they worshiping? The confusion? Jews are worshiping the devil. Where do people get this idea? It doesn't even make sense from the logic that was just offered there, you know. Now, I was born in 1950, and so I'm a boomer, right? So the post-war post-Second World War, that was all kind of part of my life growing up. And then the Vietnam War, I was a young adult at that time. And, of course, the phrase, now that the Jews had their homeland and that was to protect them from this kind of thing, the phrase they use all the time was never again, never again. And I'm thinking, that seems a bit excessive, you know. Who would ever countenance repeating what Hitler did? Yeah, there are Holocaust deniers who take them seriously, but they just seem to be on the lunatic fringe, like flat earthers, hardly noticed, you know. Let the dead bury the dead. That's my line for people like this, right? And I've actually been to Nazi extermination camps. I've been to Auschwitz-Birkenau. I've been to Majdanek, two of the six. Sobibor, Chelmno, Treblinka, Belzec. These were the six. And I've been to two of them. I've actually spent an evening, I spent a night and a day at a man's house with his family who was in Auschwitz. This was in Czechoslovakia in 1976, the things that he explained to me. You know, I just think, how could... Isn't that fresh enough in our memory to not be willing to countenance anything even similar? Yet, something is happening right now. So, I don't know. Go ahead. I sometimes am at a loss for words about this. So, Amy... Well, when we were chatting about what we were going to talk about, Greg, it occurred to me, we're going to go through a lot of answers to questions people have and what kind of attitude we should have towards the Jews and that sort of thing. But I just read a quote from Carl Truman that explains what he thinks is happening here. Carl Truman from The Rise and Triumph of the Modern Self, etc., etc. Yeah. A really good guy, just so we just make it clear. Yes. He writes, he has a new book out. It's called The Desecration of Man. And it's about what happens when a culture gives up God. And listen to this quote. It's a little bit lengthy, but I think it's worth it because I think it explains some of this. He says, modern society glories in transgression and transgression is exhilarating. That note of transgression is a deep part of the culture of the modern world. In Thomas Mann's novel, The Magic Mountain, Claudia Schauscheg gives voice to this when she declares that morality should not be sought in virtue, but rather in sin. In so doing, she represents a dominant cultural pathology that is particularly notable in today's cultural elites. Transgression of that once considered sacred has become their primary task and transgression of the sacred is exhilarating precisely because it makes us feel like gods, the creators of our own meanings and our own selves. All we need to do is cross lines previously enforced by the idea of God and we thereby assume the role of being gods. We see this all around us. And this is hearkening back to his idea of expressive individualism and how we find our value and our identity in our self-expression. So, what he's saying here is that this is what's happening in our culture, but so far he's he's talked mostly about the left. But listen to what he says. Okay, hold on for just a sec because I have a reflection on that. And this is something you see in Hollywood. It goes beyond self-expression. It really goes to what he's saying. The liberty to profane the sacred. The liberty to profane the sacred. It's interesting when you look back at rock groups of the late 50s and early 60s, they were very ordinary looking. When the Beatles came on on the scene in the early 60s, they were scandalized, scandalizing because they had long hair. I mean, when you look at them now, you think, wow, it's nothing. That's weird. They still wear suits, you know, but their hair was long. Now it's like people, the gatekeeper types, think of Hollywood right now. They go out of their way to look absolutely bizarre. Okay, oh, this is a this is a black tie event. Okay, I'm going to wear shorts and a, you know, a string T-shirt and mess my hair up and just to show everybody I don't have to obey their rules. You know, so that kind of thing, profaning the sacred, has been going on for a long time. So then he continues, Christian morality is restrictive. Only by breaking its taboos can we have the exhilaration of realizing ourselves as free. Does this sound familiar? Yeah. And this exaltation and transgression is not restricted to any political group. The recent rise in popularity of Holocaust denial and Hitler rehabilitation among the very online right functions along similar lines as its advocates delight in parading their ideological transgression before the world and mocking their opponents. Smashing old standards of decency and kindness rooted in the Christian ethic is fun, even compulsory, in order to appear authentic. Yeah. I think this is a really good insight. And here we have been, you know, noticing where this is happening on the left and calling it out. And now it's, it's happening on the right. So how does that comport, though, with what's happening with conservatives? Because part of being a conservative, just thinking in a political sense, is conserving. It's reactionary. It's going back to the things, reactionary in the sense of going back to the past and the stabilized things, not reactive. That's different. And so you would think that a hallmark of conservatism is to go back to those tried and true stable things and not be going back to the sacred and not trying to profane the sacred all the more. I think what's happening is there, okay, obviously those ideas aren't properly conservative, these transgressive ideas on the right. But if you have someone who is affirming, I think about if you're a young person and all day long you're being attacked for your conservative views, and then someone comes along and they say, hey, I agree with this and this conservative view, and they get you on their side. And then they start saying things that are a little bit crazy. And they just bring you along that path. Meanwhile, other conservatives don't want to call it out because they don't want to hurt their movement. And so it just grows and grows. And then people kind of back away from it and it just kind of gains steam that way. That's the only thing I can think of because you're right. These are not properly conservative ideas, but they are targeting conservatives with them because here is a way for them to express this transgressiveness that our society celebrates, but to do it still staying against their opponents. But now that they've found a way that they can do it on their side. Okay, so that's strange to be coming from self-professed conservatives. It's even stranger to be coming from self-professed Christians. That's my biggest concern. I expect the world to be anti-Semitic, you know, and there are waves of this going on, although there is a bit of surprise. Wait, do you remember this thing called the Second World War? Now, I've read lots of books on this. It's a favorite area of my interest. I've watched lots of movies about it. I mean, I remember watching the Wannsee, I think is the name of the movie, but it's about the Wannsee protocols that were actually minutes of that survived. There are like 20 copies, only one survived, but the minutes of a meeting held on January 20th, 1942.

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

of high-ranking Nazis and the person presiding was Reinhard Heydrich, and he was also known as the butcher of Prague, and he was assisted by Adolf Eichmann. And their whole goal there was to draw up the plans for what came euphemistically as the final solution to the Jewish question, or just simply the final solution. So, I mean, this is, is this like ancient history to people? Don't they realize what happened and what was done? Well, here's what they're arguing. You'll notice that Truman referred to Hitler rehabilitation. This is what's happening. They're arguing that the whole narrative was propaganda, that Hitler was people going so far as to say Hitler was the good guy in this situation. So this is, it's very serious, and this is why I had no idea that people were falling for this. Well, I, I mentioned in earlier broadcasts we did together that I read the entire rise and fall of the Third Reich, okay? William Shirer. And he was there for the whole thing. It's a classic. It's big. It's over a thousand pages. But you can also, you can also read Inside the Third Reich by Speer, who is, he ran the whole operations thing for the Third Reich and the war. He was on the inside. He escaped the tribunals, but he, I mean, it isn't like there's somebody just making up a bunch of crackpot history here. We've got all kinds of sources. I don't know who they think made all these false stories up, but where are they getting, where are these people getting the truth? It's so unusual. It's almost like it's so bizarre, some people think it must be true, because it's so completely bizarre. I don't know what's going through people's minds. I think that might be part of it, Greg. I think it's this distrust of authority, and when people are speaking out with this courage, I mean, that's, like Truman points out, that's attractive to people. Yeah. Well, pardon me for having to say something rather obvious, but hating a group of people because they are part of a group of people is nothing more than the foulest form of bigotry. Now, I'm not using the word racism because that's improperly used a lot of places. It doesn't apply here, my understanding of classical racism. But it certainly is the most grotesque kind of bigotry. I saw this little meme. It was two photos. It was a photo of a, like a four, very cute blonde, four-year-old girl with a cowboy outfit and a hat. And then a similar photo of a girl who's Japanese, and she's got the little, what do you call it, the little, like a parasol. Thank you. There you go. Girls know about these kinds of things. And it said blaming this girl, let's see, for racism. For slavery. For slavery, yeah, that's it. Blaming this girl for slavery, that's the white girl, is the same as blaming this girl, the Japanese girl, for Pearl Harbor. It was a great little meme. I loved it because it was so powerful and visual. But I don't know why people don't get the common sense about that. And I think there is a sense here now where people, of course, certainly part of the theological, what people think of the theological justification for anti-Semitism is these are Christ killers, okay? That's the language that's often used. Well, in this piece I just read, the enemies of Christ, referring to the Jews. Nothing here is new, and these arguments are very old, and this is why people need to spot them at the beginning before they take off. Now, I'm not an expert at all in the propaganda and in the things people have said about Jews over the last couple thousand years. And I hope, Greg, at some point you'll have someone on who is an expert in that. But none of these things are new. That's just the bottom line there. It's just coming back around again. And as World War II and all the details of that slip back into the past, then we have a whole new generation, which reminds me of the Genesis where it says, And a Pharaoh rose that did not know Joseph. You know, and then everything changed. But, I mean, just for the record, I told you, I spent the night in the home in a little village called Trebone in southern Bohemia in 1976 with a family who cooked on a wood stove, whose the father had survived Auschwitz. And, in fact, he was a Sonderkommando. In other words, that's the people that were chosen and forced to manage the bodies of the dead people in the ovens and all of that. I spent the evening with him. I had a long conversation with, of course, this is a little bit different, but with the guy who actually survived the Bataan Death March, you know. If you showed me pictures of that in Google, I could show you the guy. I mean, all of this is real stuff. And let me just say, the reason why I brought this to you, Greg, and said you should talk about on this show, it's because people, normal people, we're not talking about crazy evil people. We're talking about kids, probably your kids, if you're listening to this. They're being taken in by certain kind of gateway questions, but I think there are real people who are struggling with these questions because when they're presented with them, they don't know how to respond. And so I really was hoping you could give them an answer as to how to think about these questions that they're hearing. Sure. Well, one of them has to do with, is it okay to oppose the physical nation of Israel? Now, of course, sometimes the devil's in the details. And in this case, the detail is the word oppose. On the one hand, opposing could be disagreeing. On the other hand, opposing could be much, much more aggressive. Okay. And so we're also going to ask about the, we'll talk about the references to the so-called synagogue of Satan that we see in Revelation 2 that phrase actually shows up with regards to two different churches that John is writing about in that Revelation. We'll get to that in a few moments. But like so many issues, we have to answer the theological issues by going back to the text. And when I say we go back to the text, we are not just going back to a verse that we're cherry-picking and deciding we know what it means. We have to look at the full counsel of Scripture to see the very big picture. And we were talking this morning, Amy, you are very close to finishing your memorization project of the book of Romans. And you made a comment to me about, I mean, it's amazing. You have two chapters left, right? I should say, okay, start now from the beginning. But anyway, but you made an observation, though, that really is pertinent to this about, in a sense, seeing the big picture. Well, what, the thing that is good for this time is that when the New Testament was being written, there were a lot of questions about how Christians should interact with Jews, how we should interact with the law, Jewish believers and Christian believers together, how are they going to mix? These were all really important questions. And in Romans, you see this whole book is geared kind of towards this question. It's about why salvation is by grace, why we all need it, whether we have the law or don't have the law, how that fits in with why aren't the Jews believing? Has God failed? And then he explains. Or has he forgotten them and moved on? Has he forgotten them? Has he rejected them? All of these questions are addressed. And then he talks about, well, then where does this leave us with people who have the conviction that they need to follow the Mosaic Law and the people who don't want to follow it? How does that work out? It's all about integrating the Jewish and Gentile believers in Christ and about why all the Jews are not believing in Christ. And all of this is wrapped up in the gospel and the big picture of what God is doing in salvation history. So the phrase that I think is the operative phrase is the big picture in salvation history. And I want to touch on this a little bit because one of the passages that was cited here by someone regarding this, and I think it's a legitimate question, and as you pointed out, there are a lot of people are just wondering, and how do I deal with this? Exodus 23.22. But if you truly obey the angel's voice and do all that I say, then I will be an enemy to your enemies and an adversary to your adversaries. Now, I think the takeaway for this, for the person, is that supporting Israel is about them doing what's right. And if they don't do what's right, then we are free to oppose the nation as such. Okay. And because God

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

God isn't going to support them in everything, and this was kind of a part of a larger proof text, and we certainly see in the book of Deuteronomy, after the law is given a second time, from 28 to 30, we have a kind of a post script of the giving of that law. And what Moses writes there is says, look, if you do these things, lots of good stuff is going to come your way. Blessing, blessing, blessing for obedience. And it spends like 10 verses. And then for the next 50 verses, he says, if you don't do it, here are the curses, here are the curses, and bang, bang, bang, bang, bang. You go back to Deuteronomy 28, 29, and you can read it all there. It's there. The Mosaic covenant is a conditional covenant. All right. You do good, you get good. You do bad, you're going to get bad. All right. And they did bad. They broke that covenant, which is why God had to give them a new covenant known as the new covenant. Jeremiah 31, 31. Behold, I am going to give you a new covenant, not like the one that you broke when you came out of Egypt. All right. So there's a contrast there. I agree with this point that when Israel's disobedient, God is going to oppose them. All right. But that doesn't inform our posture. How God is going to discipline that people is not the thing that ought to inform our posture towards national Israel. Well, I think it's legitimate to say that in light of this verse, that it's not a, how can I put this? You don't have to blindly say whatever they do is right. I mean, that's obvious. Not even God does that. You can see that in this verse. Right. Now, parents don't do that with their children either. No, no. What God cares about is morality and goodness. And we ought to always do what is right. We ought to always support what is right. And we ought to oppose what's wrong. So there, but there is a difference between disagreeing with a policy and disagreeing or being suspicious because they're Jews and Jews control the world. Yeah, there's, there's, that's different. And sometimes it takes a while before you realize that is what, what's behind the question. Well, I'm just disagreeing with their policy. Okay, maybe, maybe that's true. Certainly we can disagree. I have no problem with that. But why are you disagreeing? Is it because you think that they are controlling everyone in power in the United States? Well, now it starts to sound a little bit suspicious. And in fact, it starts to sound like what people have been saying for hundreds of years. And this is where it starts to get to be a problem. So, yes, I can affirm that we agree with them when they do what is right. We can disagree when they don't do what is right. But are you, are you responding to them the same way you would respond to any nation? Certainly I disagree with some things Great Britain does, but that's different than the kind of conspiratorial thinking that goes behind what, you know, Israel is doing. So what I want to do, that's all really great observations. Amy and I agree with that. I made kind of a passing reference to we don't do that with our children. And I think there, there is an analog here. Of course, it's okay to chastise Israel anytime Israel is disobedient to God. That's what every single prophet did. They were covenant enforcers and they were chastising Israel in virtue of the fact that they had a covenant with God, they had a special unique role in God's larger plan for salvation, and they were not, they were not obedient to their role. And therefore they were being chastised and not only that, they were being judged. Now, it's kind of interesting though, that when you see the times when God would even bring another nation against Israel to judge Israel for their disobedience, that he also judged the other nations who did that out of their own animosity towards Israel and God judged them as well. And we'll see examples of that. This is something that you've noticed. We've talked about this before. You know, even though God is sovereignly using them, he's still protective of the nation of Israel in that circumstance. And this all goes back, and here's where I want to try to lay a theological foundation to give that big picture of salvation history, so to speak. And incidentally, if anybody wants, like, chapter and verse of the whole thing, just go to str.org and under training materials in the bookstore, wherever that is, I don't use our website, so I have a lot of... There's a... the store. Just go to the store. Okay, the store. Yeah. It is called The Bible Fast Forward. The Bible Fast Forward. There are eight sessions that are 50 minutes each where, and a huge workbook, 150 pages, all the notes, everything. You don't have to take a note at all. It's all there. My lecture notes are there plus some. And what I am going to just sketch out in a thumbnail sketch kind of way, I give you everything there and you could, and I, I promise you, if you go through that, you will understand the salvation history in a way you never did before. Because if you read, say, Story of Reality, we got God, man, Jesus, cross, resurrection. Okay, that's like the storyline, the plot line I talk about. Many of our listeners, Amy has read that. And what they don't realize is there's a huge gap between the man and the Jesus part. And that's the whole nation of Israel, the history there, as God is working through the covenants. And how do you get from fallen man to Jesus, the Messiah? And that's what I do in The Bible Fast Forward. But one of the things I point out, the first major historical event of the nation of Israel is there in Genesis chapter 12, the first three verses, which are the most important verses in the scripture with regards to salvation history. Because there God takes one man and he makes a promise to that man to use that man to build a whole nation that God will use to reach the earth, the rest of the earth. So this isn't just a passing thought about Jews and God's, oh, you know, he's playing favorites, so he likes the Jews now and then he gets mad at them, now he likes the Christians. No, this is God's salvation plan for the world. And that verse says, now I said, the Lord said to Abram, go forth from your country and from your relatives and from your father's house to a land which I will show you. And I will make you a great nation. I will bless you. I will make your name great. And so, in other words, here's the consequence. Here's the goal. You shall be a blessing. And I will bless those who bless you, and the one who curses you I will curse. And in you, all the nations or the families of the earth will be blessed. Now, I pause there at that one section because this is important. God is making a nation to reach the world, and the ultimate blessing to the nations is the new covenant in Jesus. But he has also committed himself to protect this nation that he is going to use for a purpose. And he said, I'm going to bless you, and those who oppose you, look out. I am going to protect you. So they're inside the family now. Now, I'm giving a kind of characterization that some people will disagree with, and I don't know, we're not even on the same page on some of the details here, but that actually doesn't matter for a bigger point, I think, Amy. And so God has, has set up this plan and it entails this nation. Okay? And that's the unfolding of the Abrahamic covenant and actually there is reference to this in Romans 9. You'll probably refer to that in a minute, but I just want you to see that when, if you turn two pages to Genesis 15, Abraham is like, wait a minute, you made this promise and I'm an old guy, I have no kids. Eliezer of Damascus is the head of my household and he'll, he's going to get my inheritance. And God says to them, no, it won't be Eliezer of Damascus. He says, he said, but rather one who will come forth from your own loins. So God is identifying a particular race of people, which race is going to be the race that will be the carrier of the covenants and communicating to the world God's purposes. And I go into detail in that class on that. Okay? Now, once they get the Mosaic law, that's a conditional one and they didn't do well with that. Okay? Blessing, cursing, blessing, cursing, blessing, cursing. And that's not good. It's interesting when you read in Deuteronomy, and I want to cite this passage because it's so, so relevant to this. What happens? What's God's attitude to the nation of Israel when they don't do what they're supposed to do? Well, he's mad, but has he abandoned them as a people and a special purposes? And here I want to read in Deuteronomy 29, or I mentioned the 28 and 29 has the blessing and cursing. Here's 30 verse 1 through 10. Pardon me for the longer passage, but so it shall be when all of these things have come upon you, the blessings and the curse, this is prophetic. You'll be blessed if you do good. You'll be cursed if you do bad. And by the way, you're going to get cursed. Because I know you'll have some good stuff, but then you're going

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

And you return to the Lord your God and obey him with all your heart and soul according to all that I command you today, you and your sons, then the Lord your God will restore you from captivity and have compassion on you and will gather you again from all the peoples where the Lord your God has scattered you, etc., etc. And there's more. I won't read all the way to verse 10, but it just repeats that notion. In other words, God's saying, look, I'm still here. You're still in the family and I'm going to deal with you, but you're not gone forever. And what's really interesting is Jeremiah picks up on this, I think, in the famous verse that's misused, Jeremiah 29:11, where God says, I will fulfill my good, I know the plans I have for you, plans for welfare and not calamity, etc. But just before, he says, I will fulfill my good word to you. Now, he's talking to the Jews. That's a letter that's going to the people in captivity. That's the context. Why does he mean he's going to fulfill his good word to them? I read that. I said, he's referring to something he's already said. And then I go back to Deuteronomy 30 and there you see in almost exactly the same words of what God will do if people, if the Jews turn back, it's cited by Jeremiah. Now, with that in mind, I want to read Jeremiah 29, which I made reference to. Oh, no, make that 31. Behold, the days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah, not like the covenant which I made with their fathers in the day I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, my covenant which they broke, although I was a husband to them. And then he goes on to describe details of the new covenant. But notice this is Jeremiah prophesying during this time of deportation. They're being disciplined. But he says, look, good things are coming. Now, here's the thing that I just want people to think about. And this, this is the reason why one of the main reasons that I believe that Israel still has a, as a country, as a significant role in God's unfolding plan for the world. And here's verse 35. Thus says the Lord who gives the sun for light by day and the fixed order of the moon and the stars for light by night, who stirs up the sea so that waves roar. The Lord of hosts is his name. If this fixed order departs, what fixed order? The sun and the moon and the sea and the waves roaring. If this fixed order departs from me, then the offspring of Israel will also cease from being a nation before me forever. If the heavens above can be measured and the foundations of the earth searched out below, then I will cast off all the offspring of Israel for all that they have done, declares the Lord. Now, of course, he's speaking hyperbolically there. That's never going to happen. That means God's never going to cast them off. Even though he's disciplining them as members of the family, the message I just want to convey here with those references, Amy, is you can't, if you're a Christian and you believe the covenants of the Bible and the role that God has chosen Israel to do to be a blessing to the, you can't just dismiss them all and say they're all bad because God hasn't done that, according to this verse here, Jeremiah and a whole bunch of others. And when you do that, when it's not the same as criticizing their behaviors and nothing wrong with that. But when you set yourself up against Israel, then what happens is you are setting yourself up against God's chosen people that he's chosen for a plan. And then the language of Genesis chapter 12 and the Abrahamic covenant, I think comes into play properly. Those who bless you, I will bless. And those who curse you, I will curse. Now, again, that doesn't mean we have to say everything's okay because that isn't what the prophets did. It's just like we chastise our children for their wrongdoing, but we don't banish them from the family with prejudice. Like you're gone forever. We don't do that. And I think people have adopted the idea that this is the case with it. And therefore they're free to oppose Israel without, with prejudice. Okay. And it's just, it's just so interesting when you read Deuteronomy 28 through 30 and then 31 through 10, which I just touched on because you see that going on. And by the way, I'm just looking at some other notes. Did you want to respond to what I have to say? I have a lot to say. I don't know if I can fit it into 15 minutes. Oh gosh, read it. Time is flying by. So what do you have some New Testament stuff that you want to focus in on? Why don't you spend the time doing that? Okay. So the reason, let me just explain why I'm in here in this room right now. A lot of people will dismiss what Greg said because he's a dispensationalist and they dismiss dispensationalism and say they're the problems there. They've got it wrong about Israel and they're the problem. Yeah. And just for the record, dispensationalists, at least with regards to this conversation, I mean, I think Israel still has a role as a nation and God made promises that he's going to keep. That's the pivotal point of dispensationalism, right? So I'm coming from a different perspective. And the reason why I want to give my perspective is because you don't have to be a dispensationalist to be against what's happening. You don't have to be. And in fact, it is super clear in Romans 9 through 11, three things, what our attitude should be towards the Jews, what their position is now, and God's plan, how this is playing a part in God's overall sovereign plan. So I'm going to give my perspective here because there will be a lot of people who will identify with what I'm saying. And if there are, you know, people who aren't reformed and not part of the dispensational side of that, now they can hear, look, even if you disagree with anything Greg said so far, maybe you'll agree with me and I can still make a case for what we're talking about here. So I would say, in Romans, Paul uses the words Jew and Israel in two different senses. And in Galatians also. The first way is national Israel. These are those who are physically descended from Abraham. But in Romans 9, 6, he says, they are not all Israel who are descended from Israel, nor are they all children because they are Abraham's descendants. Now, I'm going to give you a little bit of background here, and then we're going to go to 9 through 11. Hopefully I've got time. I can fit this all in. So if you go back to, like, starting in, well, earlier in Romans, the second way he uses it is that he uses those words to refer to those who are in covenant with God by faith. And he says those are descendants of Abraham, Jews and Gentiles. Romans 4, 13 through 18 talks about being a descendant of Abraham by faith rather than by the flesh. Here's what it says. For the promise to Abraham or to his descendants that he would be heir of the world was not through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. For those who are of the law are heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is nullified, for the law brings about wrath. But where there is no law, there also is no violation. He's just saying that God always intended, like with the covenant with Abraham, for this promise to be fulfilled by grace. For this reason, it is by faith in order that it may be in accordance with grace so that the promise will be guaranteed to all the descendants, not only to those who are of the law, but also to those who are of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all, as it is written, a father of many nations have I made you in the presence of him whom he believed. And it says in hope against hope, he believed so that he might become a father of many nations according to that which had been spoken, so shall your descendants be. So there is a sense in which Paul is referring to his descendants in terms of those who are in the covenant of faith that was given to Abraham. And that includes, you know, that's the many nations, according to Paul here. Same thing shows up in Galatians. The promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. He does not say into seeds as referring to many, but to one and to your seed. That is Christ. And he says, what I'm saying is this, the law which came 430 years later does not invalidate a covenant previously ratified by God. So what he's saying is the fact that God gave the law and they broke it doesn't nullify the covenant of grace that he made with Abraham. And then he says again, for if the inheritance is based on law, it is no longer based on a promise, but God has granted it to Abraham by means of a promise. For you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus. And then he says, if you belong to Christ, then you're Abraham's descendants, heirs according to the promise. Now I'm just setting up what's going to happen here in 9 through 11. Romans 8, 16 also says, and if children, if we are children, we're heirs also, heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ. Okay, so now Paul has said the Jews are heirs of this promise. And he's made these claims like you're not, there's not all Israel is,

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

And he's tying all of this in to God's overall sovereign plan. So he starts by saying, I could wish that I myself were accursed, separated from Christ for the sake of my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites, to whom belongs the adoption as sons and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the law and the temple services and the promises, whose are the fathers and from whom is the Christ according to the flesh, who is overall God blessed forever. Amen. So here we see, what is Paul's attitude towards those who don't believe who are Jews? He's saying he could wish that he were accursed for their sake. Trade places. He is not showing any hatred here. This is a love where he's willing to give up his own salvation. We should have that kind of love. Why? He says, because all of these things God gave belonged to the Israelites. He says again, back in Romans 3, when he says, when he's talking about how you're a Jew if you're one inwardly by the circumcision, by the flesh. So then he says, so what, then what advantage has the Jew? And he says, great in every respect. First of all, they were entrusted with the oracles of God. Scripture, right. And so he's talking about how they are honored and they've been given this place in God's plan, and he, and we'll get to more of this when we get into chapter 11. So then he, so then he starts asking these questions, these objections that he expects. And he says, but it's not as though the word of God has failed. The fact that not all the Jews are believing doesn't mean God has failed. And then he says, for they are not all Israel who are descended from Israel, nor are they all children because they are Abraham's descendants. And he says, through Isaac, your descendants will be named. That is, it's the children of the, it's not the children of the flesh who are children of God, but the children of promise. And then he talks about God promising a son to Sarah and how the line went through Isaac rather than, I mean, sorry, Jacob rather than Esau. Yes, Jacob rather than Esau. And what he's doing here is he's starting to set up the reason why the Jews aren't believing. And at this point, he's only indicating that the plan is going somewhere, but he hasn't gotten to the main point yet. He's still working on that. So then, of course, he expects the objection, well, if God chose some and then didn't choose others, then how is that just? And then he makes the point that God will have compassion on whom he will have compassion, and he will harden those whom he hardens. Why? Because he has this plan to reveal himself and his power and his wrath and his grace. So he, again, you will say to me then, why does he still find fault for who resists his will? And again, he goes on. He's talking about how he, what God is having patience right now with those who are going to be under his wrath because he's got a plan to reveal his glory. And we are so running out of time. I'm sorry, Amy. I talked too much here at the front end. I don't know if I can get through all this, Greg. You know, if you want, we can just carry it over to the next show for a little bit. OK, I think we might have to because I think you have to see how all these things are working together if you want to know how we should respond. And you still have to answer those other questions also. Yeah, like the synagogue of Satan and stuff. Yeah, we're trying to build a biblical case from actually two different angles. One I'm making from what might be called a dispensational perspective that Israel has a special role that God said he's not going to abandon them. And when you oppose Israel as Israel, then you are opposing God's larger purposes. OK, it doesn't mean you can't chastise them or correct them or say, I don't agree with that policy or whatever. But when you set yourself up against them, like these people are doing, the anti-Semites, they are against Israel. They're not just against some of the things that Israel did, like the prophets did, you know. And they are putting themselves in the same position, it seems to me, Amy, of those other nations who had hostilities towards Israel that God used to judge Israel with. But that didn't mean they were off the hook. They were judged by God. And we have some passages that relate to that very thing, but we will get to that and we'll try to give you an opportunity in the next show to finish out a little more relaxed fashion. Some of these ideas that you have. And then we do need to get to the issue of the synagogue of Satan because you see that phrase in the book of Revelation, and it's, it is historically been used to encourage anti-Semitism. And it, it's another one of the things that trouble me, Amy, when I see people's taken a passage and I, and I ask, what occurs to me is, did you like read the whole thing? Are you following this whole thing and reading where you're just snatching a phrase out that is meant to, you think, justify rank bigotry? And the things that I read from Twitter, I think, are just, just unconscionable bigotry. Corrie ten Boom, please. And you also need to answer the question about whether or not they're worshiping a false god. And I, and I, I'm just going to give a little preview that where Paul is going is so beautiful and amazing. And so I hope everyone will come back again and hear how Paul weaves together all these things to help us to understand what God is doing because you have to understand what God is doing if you want to know that he has not failed in what he has been doing this whole time with salvation when he started with the Jews. Right. And they, all of this also, he ties in with our attitude very, very strongly because the big point of the big picture also is intended to direct how we should respond to them and how we should treat them. Right. Well, there's so much that's worthwhile on this broader teaching that I've given called the Bible fast forward, where I really, really work on the history of the nation of Israel, the unfolding plan of God through the 12 major events of the nation of Israel and how it all fits together in such a beautiful way. And of course, when you see it all fit together, regardless of other kind of theological commitments, you see God working through these people and there is no biblical justification for the kind of bigotry that is being expressed in this unfortunate rising movement. All right, that's our music. We will pick up on the next show with, now we have this little cliffhanger. It reminds me of Flash Gordon series. All right, Greg Koukle with Amy Hall for Stand to Reason. Go out and give them heaven, friends. Bye-bye now.
