# From Extreme Depression to Street Preacher: How God Saved His Life with Bryce Crawford

- Publication date: 2026-06-12
- RSS GUID: `https://crossexamined.org/?p=103673`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Ladies and gentlemen, how did a Christian teenager who was considering suicide just five years ago blossom into a 22-year-old street preacher? And how is this young man filling venues around the country talking about Jesus even in secular cities like Boston and New York? And how does he reach hardened atheists, homeless people, and even people in different lifestyles that are normally hostile to Christianity? What approach is he using to bring young people to Jesus? And why does he have one of the top religious podcasts in the U.S.? He's got 3.1 million Instagram followers, almost a million YouTube followers. He just graduated from Liberty University. He just got married. That's why he's got two pink lamps behind him. Who am I talking about? I'm talking about my friend, Bryce Crawford, ladies and gentlemen, all the way from the People's Republic of Los Angeles, where according to the Babylon Bee, Joe Biden just won the mayor race with 81 million votes. Here he is, Bryce Crawford. Bryce, great seeing you again there, brother. How are you? I'm doing well. Thank you for having me. I think that's the best intro I've ever been given anywhere, so thank you. Well, man, I just love the work you're doing. I love you. I love your new wife, Maddie. We had some time together when you were on tour. You came through Charlotte. Of course, we were together at AMFest back in December. And I know a lot of people listening probably have heard about you, but some haven't. So why don't we start with you growing up in Georgia as a teenager, the anxiety you felt. What happened? In fact, we're going to put in the show notes your complete testimony, but kind of give us an abbreviated testimony, man. What happened to you and how did you get to where you are now? I grew up going to church. I grew up at a private Christian school, but I had a warped perception of God because I associated God with the example I had seen in real life. So I saw hypocrisy and it rubbed me the wrong way. I saw people that claimed to love God and their life looked the total opposite. So that rubbed me the wrong way. But really the pivotal moment was eighth grade. My grandfather passed away from pancreatic cancer. And so because I went to private Christian school, there was kind of this responsibility on me to almost like make sure he was good with Jesus, but I didn't care about Jesus. So when he passed away, I blamed God for killing my grandfather. So that began this deep pit of depression and anxiety I battled from the eighth grade till my junior year of high school. And so through those years of battling depression and anxiety every day, not wanting to exist anymore because I thought that was the only way to get the pain to go away. When I was 17 on Christmas day of 2020, I decided that I was going to take my life and I was going to go have my last meal at basically the promised land, Waffle House. I was like, I'm going to go there and have my last meal. So that was the plan. And they never closed. They're open on Christmas and it was packed. No one preached the gospel to me. No one said the name of Jesus. I was not drunk. I was not high. I've never done drugs. I've never had a sip of alcohol before. I have a supernatural encounter with Jesus inside this Waffle House where he stops me from taking my life. And so I prayed the most honest and dangerous prayer I've ever prayed. I said, Jesus, if you're real, take away my anxiety and depression because this is why I want to take my life. And I haven't had the crippling anxiety or depression since that day. It's been over five years. And so that was my foot in the door with Jesus. And experience is awesome, but that doesn't sustain the faith. And so that experience was where I surrendered my life to Jesus. And then I started diving into the scriptures, studying books, reading books, reading theology textbooks, everything I could grab onto, actually listening in Bible class in school. And that was where my faith began. So I've seen you speak. I've seen or heard your podcast. I mean, you went from a 17-year-old who was, as you say, full of anxiety and depression to somebody who's very articulate, very brave, and totally focused on Jesus. I know that you accredit at least a good part of that to the Holy Spirit. What else happened that brought you now, after just five years, to you might be the top in terms of following young preacher in the world right now. How did this happen? Can you retrace this, Bryce? I mean, I've always had, I took a senior writing class in high school because I always liked putting complex ideas into simple language. I don't really use a lot of big words, big vocabulary words on purpose because that's just how I'm wired and that's how I like to communicate. And so from there, taking, you know, hard poetry and condensing it into simple language, I kind of took that and ran with it when it came to the Bible or a theological concept or things like that. So that, I guess, practically, that's where it came from. But I was reading Charles Spurgeon the other day and he was talking about how wisdom and prudence and all these things follow from zeal. It like starts with zeal and then it all follows. And when I'm looking back on my life, just from an honest perspective, my passion for Christ has only increased. Like it's never, the fire's never dimmed. That's, it's constantly increased over time because I'm trying to stoke the fire. So I think just being in love with Jesus has caused this practicality of, okay, I'm gonna use these skills that I learned in my senior writing class to help me communicate the Bible. And I'm gonna study more and I'm gonna read these books and I'm gonna pray more and I'm gonna step out in faith and I'm gonna figure out different ways to phrase the gospel that is sound but also communicates to the people that are hostile. So there was a lot of that that came just from this deep love of Jesus. Now I know there are young people watching right now and particularly older people, parents as well, who would love to have their kids have the zeal that you have. You got that zeal and you started reading and watching. You mentioned Spurgeon. Who are some of the other people that you have watched and that have helped you be an effective communicator of the gospel? Well, I've been watching you for years if we wanna really go down that rabbit hole. Watching you for years. The people who are already here know me, but I know you had Cliff Connectly. You were with Cliff out at ASU. Cliff's a great friend and he's a friend of yours. I love Cliff. He's been on campuses, as you know, Bryce, since the 1980s. Yeah, double my age, he's been on college campuses. Oh yeah, oh yeah. So who else? Who else have you been? I mean, the first textbook I ever read, theology textbook, was Systematic Theology by Wayne Grudem. So Wayne Grudem, Charles Spurgeon, C.S. Lewis, R.C. Sproul. I mean, I love John Piper's stuff. I love, I mean, he has a whole book that's just asking John questions and that's a great resource. The McDowell family, they have great textbooks on apologetics. I mean, they just made a new one. That's like an updated, expanded version, but the old ones I have on my bookshelf. But I really just tried to surround myself with people that carried deep pursuit. Tim Keller was another big one. I mean, these legends are just absolutely incredible. And it's so cool how we can be blessed by the ministry of people that their body, physical body isn't here with us, but they're present with the Lord. It's crazy how their ministry then is still impacting us today. So those are just a few of the guys that I really have learned from heavily. You know, our mutual friend Jack Hibbs said, if you're not dead, you're not red. And the reason he says that is because he wants to make sure that somebody finishes well, right? You know, like Spurgeon finished well, right? C.S. Lewis finished well. You can trust them. They're not gonna go apostate at the end of their lives. They're dead, okay? You can trust them. And so that's, I think that's some pretty good advice that Jack has. Now, you also, you have a lot of courage. You know, our mutual friend Charlie Kirk would say that he loves the concept of courage because it doesn't take any skill. It just takes a decision. You have a lot of courage. And when we come back from the break, we're gonna play a couple of clips. You go to pride events. You go to where homeless folks are who may cause trouble for you. Where do you get the courage to do this kind of thing? It all stems down from the greatest commandment of loving God and loving people. Because when I began to see myself the way that God saw me, I realized that the price tag God put on my life is the same price tag he put on everyone else's. And in my mind, if someone can be so extreme and zealous for something that's false, how much more extreme and on fire can they be for Jesus when they realize he's the way, the truth, and the life and he is the antidote to everything that they've been searching for everywhere else but in him? So that's kind of where it all comes from. It's this deep, the greatest commandment is the pillar to wanting to love God for yourself and loving people and using your gifts for the glory of God. That's where it's all stemmed from for me. He's doing it, ladies and gentlemen. Bryce Crawford, you need to check him out on

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

Welcome back to I Don't Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist. My guest is Bryce Crawford, 22 years old. He's filling venues around the country so people can hear him preach about Jesus. In fact, I'm wearing a shirt right now. Check this out. Those of you on YouTube, you can see this. This is the I Love Jesus and Jesus Loves You tour. This is the tour that Bryce had just a few months ago across the country. I got this shirt. He gave it to me, actually, when I was with him here in Charlotte. And Bryce, how did, how did you plan that tour? What did you do on that tour? Why, I mean, I know some people are going to go, you had to actually pay to go hear a guy preach about Jesus. Yeah, because these theaters cost a lot of money. I mean, Bryce, ladies and gentlemen, was going into New York City and renting theaters and going into Boston and renting theaters and Chicago and all this. So you had to actually pay because it costs a lot of money to rent these places. Tell us about this tour, Bryce. Who thought of it? How did you pull it off? What did you do at these various venues around the country? And you had kids coming and even older people coming from all over to see you. Yeah, I mean, that was, I've always had a heart to gather. And when I first became a believer, I would volunteer at conferences and stuff around 17 and 18 years old. Not as many people were gathering, but now we're seeing the opposite. A lot of people want to gather for Jesus right now. And so the idea was, let's bring this message across the country and equip believers and make them fired up for their faith so that they can go and they can go be the light. Because it's selfish to try to hold the baton and think, there's only one person that can preach the gospel and it's Bryce Crawford. That's such a selfish way to view the gospel. Everyone can preach the gospel. Everyone can be bold for their faith. And so we had some great people and a great team that came alongside the guys at 33 and West. They approached us and helped us navigate the tour. And you're absolutely right. I mean, we're 22 years old and it was, we had to rent these venues. So unfortunately we had to charge a ticket, but that allowed us to go into these spaces. So really the people that were paying a ticket to come see the events, they were basically asking us to be there. It means that they wanted it because they were allowing us to rent the space and come in and bring our team. And Liberty University's worship collective, they came alongside the whole tour and led worship. And that was fun to have students from the fellow university I just graduated from to come alongside of it. And really the heart was, it's a live podcast tour. And if there are non-believers that are too afraid to go to church, they can come to a Bryce Crawford live podcast, hear Jesus and get plugged in and they can go back to their local church. So really what we're trying to do is we're trying to introduce the gospel to people that may be afraid of church and then get them in that habit of, okay, I do want to step into church. I do want to go deeper in my faith. For those believers that are already following Jesus, we just want to stoke that flame because sometimes following Jesus can be hard and challenging and feel lonely and all of these things. And we wanted to be an encouragement to anyone on the spectrum of faith, whether they don't believe in Jesus or they're on fire for him. Now I noticed when you were here in Charlotte, you were just deciding kind of that day, okay, what passage am I going to preach from today? It's not the same thing at every venue you go to. So what were some of the messages, if you can remember, that you brought at these various venues? Yeah, so one of my favorite messages that we had brought was in Houston. We talked about how in Leviticus, it talks about the scapegoat, how they would cast a lot over a goat and the goat would, the sins of Israel would be like verbally released over this goat and then it would run. It would flee. And then the second goat would be sacrificed for the sins of Israel. And I talked about that comparison with Jesus and Barabbas and how Barabbas's first name, Barabbas means son of the father. His first name was Jesus. I can't remember if it's Matthew or Mark, but it says, you have Jesus Barabbas and Jesus. So you have two Jesuses standing on the stage. And this idea of going, you have Jesus, son of the father, and you have Jesus, son of the heavenly father, both standing on this stage. And Barabbas is the scapegoat that flees. And that passage of scripture just encouraged so many people because how many people want to read Leviticus? You know, how many people want to do that? It's a hard one. And then we preached out of Philemon in, I believe, New Jersey. And that was interesting because I asked the audience how many people knew Philemon existed in their Bible. And over half of them did not know it was in their Bible. And I think Philemon is one of the greatest New Testament letters, in my opinion. I love it. I love it. So those were a couple of my favorites. Isn't it interesting, Leviticus, nobody wants to read it. Certainly nobody wants to do it in the sense of bringing sacrifices to the temple. It's so onerous. And yet Jesus frees us from all that. Right? I mean, he totally did away with the sacrificial system because the whole sacrificial system was just looking forward to the ultimate lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world. And so you had a different message at every venue. Now, I remember when we spoke a couple of months ago about this, you went from Charlotte, then you think you went up to Liberty, if I'm not mistaken. And then you went to Jersey, and then you went to New York City, and then you went to Boston. And I remember you telling me that Boston, for some reason, was maybe the best one of all. You would think Boston, you know, it's like the least Christian. Of course, it was the most Christian at the founding of our country, but it's completely flipped. Why was Boston such an amazing event? What happened? Boston, New York, everything in the Northeast where the people were so excited for Jesus. And I believe it's because that doesn't happen a lot up there. Bingo. These people are so hungry for it. And again, that all falls back to why people are so afraid to talk about Jesus. I'm afraid to go into this environment because what if they don't like me? What are they going to think of me? They're going to think I hate them. But really, the Northeast was so pumped for Jesus and their faith encouraged me so much. Boston was such an encouragement to my heart. And they were just fired up for Jesus. You know, we're finding the same thing in our college events. You know, we'll go into the heart of the Bible Belt and just get a couple of hundred people show up. We go to northern Michigan as far up as you can go almost on the upper peninsula. There's a blizzard and 800 people will show up. And you go, this is not in the Bible Belt. I think people in the Bible Belt are, yeah, it's just another event. Yeah, we get a bunch of these around here. Yeah, we all believe this stuff anyway. Who cares? People who are surrounded by unbelievers are more apt to say, I want to go see Bryce or I want to go see Frank or I want to go see whatever. There's an event coming here. We don't get this very often and we need to be encouraged. We need to be equipped. So I think you're right that we're finding the least Christian areas are the most responsive to these events. Are you planning on more, Bryce? Like what are you, what's going on now? Well, I know we've talked a little bit about it, but we're trying to go on college campuses right now. Yeah, we got to do one together at least one, maybe more. Which would be so fun. I mean, we had, I think, over 1,500 college students fill out a Google form saying that they wanted us to come to their campus and talk about Jesus and partner with the ministries on campus. And so that's something that we're in the process of planning right now. And we're hopefully, we're doing an event this November in Irving, Texas at the Toyota, at the Pavilion at Toyota Music Factory right outside of Dallas, November 8th. And so we're really just asking God, where do you want us to go? And we're being obedient and listening to where he leads us. All right, good, good. College events would be great. And let me ask you this, especially concerning the younger people, your generation, I guess, mostly considered Gen Z. What do you think older people don't realize about Gen Z, particularly with regard to reaching them for Jesus? I remember when I first became a believer and I was volunteering at these events, there were a lot of older ministry leaders that would say, oh, you know, we want to reach Gen Z. We want to reach Gen Z. But then like in the green room that I'd be serving, they would be like, Gen Z is so lost. Gen Z is this, Gen Z is that. I'm like, okay, yeah, that may be true. If you keep thinking that though, you're never going to reach those people. We have to hope all things and believe the best that God's going to reach them and figure out

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

Advice plan succeed. So we all need to be open to learning from other people. And I remember this is this goes back years ago, but there Jack Welch, who used to head GE, the big company, this is probably three decades ago, with advancing technology, even three decades ago, he said, I had a younger mentor. I had somebody that would show me how to use all this new found technology I knew nothing about. I had a 19-year-old mentor, he said, because he could figure stuff out that I couldn't. So we have to be open to learning from one another, regardless of age, you know. It's really important, and you can't lead also if you don't read. So what have you been reading lately? What's kind of on your nightstand, so to speak, other than the Bible? I've got a few books, actually. I'm in John C. Maxwell's Five Levels of Leadership. I'm in C.S. Lewis's Great Divorce. I'm also in this book right now called The Little Prince. It's on my desk. It's so random. It was a recommendation. And then there's a book called The Practice of the Presence of God by Brother Lawrence, where he teaches you about how communion with the Lord doesn't just have to stop if you're leaving a quiet place, but you commune with the Lord in everything that you do. So those are a few that I've been actively reading throughout. And then I have a bunch of textbooks on, like, Logos, you know, that I've been sifting through and stuff like that. But in regards to physical books, those are the four I've been going back and forth in. You've got to be reading, ladies and gentlemen, no matter who you are, no matter how old you are. You can't be a leader if you're not a reader, and you can't disciple people if you don't read because you can't share what you don't have. So it's important to always be learning. It's important to, you know, put down the phone and actually read a book because you're not going to get discipled very well by just looking at your phone, you know. Now, Bryce, you go to Pride events, and when we come back from the break, we're going to play a clip from it, gay Pride events. And right now, of course, it's so-called Pride Month. When you go to these places, I know people can sometimes be very unkind to you. Do you have security? I mean, how do you do this? Well, we just are about to start ramping it up. We just went to one last week, and within five minutes of being there, this guy comes up to me and goes, look at you, white trash, hatred person, Bryce Crawford. And I said, okay, what do I say that's hateful? And he couldn't say a single thing that I've said that's hateful. And I said, look, man, I love you, but if you're going to tell me that I'm being hateful, you got to at least show me. That's right. And we're going to see a clip from Bryce talking to actually a drag queen right after the break at one of these Pride events. You can go to his YouTube channel at Bryce Crawford. You can go to his website. You can find him on Instagram. His material is everywhere. It's very good. And it's inspiring. Young people, a young person going out and reaching people for Jesus. A lot more on I Don't Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist. Don't go anywhere. Could you answer this question? Why doesn't God let everyone into heaven? Or do all religions get you to heaven? Well, Frank Turek can, and now you can. Watch him tackle the toughest questions from his latest college tour appearance. See real students challenge Frank and watch how truth stands up under pressure. Subscribe to our Cross-Examined YouTube channel right now to watch. That's Cross-Examined, two words, on YouTube, and sharpen your faith for the real world. How do you reach young people for Christ in very hostile environments? How do you reach older people for Christ? My friend Bryce Crawford is doing that. He's only 22, but like Charlie Kirk, he's mature beyond his years, I should say, because he's a learner. He's trying to learn from people. He's being mentored by people. He's reading. He is very, very motivational in trying to get the younger generation to at least look into Jesus and find him. I want to show you a clip of him. This is from a couple of years ago when he was at a Pride event. He was talking to a drag queen, and here's what happened. Don't sleep with your neighbor, but I still do. Like, there's certain things that I have that I've switched, but there's still like Jesus in my life. Sure, so if there are things that you switch, then would you think you're following Jesus then if you switched it out? Yeah, because Jesus never, like, God died for our sins. Right. So why do we have to sin each other and blame each other and do all that bullshit? That's what you're saying. It can seem like a cage of rules. And the way I look at it, three years ago, I became a Christian. I'm from the South. And when I had this encounter with Jesus, I realized that it wasn't a cage of rules, but it was like, God is my Father. And I listen to him, not because I have to, but because I love him. And if Jesus tells me what's right from wrong, then I should probably listen to him. Because I tried to listen to myself for so long, and I had this hole in my heart, and it never worked. And so I had to listen to Jesus. Bryce, that's great wisdom there to say I listened to myself for so long. I thought I was in a cage of rules. I had a hole in my heart, and he seemed open to what you were saying. Yeah, I mean, I love the honesty. I mean, most of these people are honest, which is great. I mean, I told you before we got back, we just talked. It's out now, but last weekend when we were at the Pride event recording the video that just came out, I mean, we had a guy that said that he wanted to legalize bestiality. We had another lady that said, I'm actually not about all this. She said the same thing that that guy just said in the video clip. Like, oh, well, I don't think God gets to define right from wrong. But she was like, oh, I love God, but I don't think he gets to define what's right from wrong. And it's like people like the idea of God until it combats what they want to do. That's right. And that's where we have to stop and say, if you actually believe in God, if you think Jesus is Lord, if you say he's your Lord and Savior, then you better act like it. You got to let him take the driver's seat of your life. You don't get to drive your life around and think that you get to add Jesus on like a necklace or a name tag. That's not that's not what faith that's not how faith is. He's our Lord. We listen to him. We let him navigate our life. So that's been that's been very interesting to navigate. What other experiences have you had at these pride events? I mean, I know you've prayed with people. I know you've had some fruit from these events. Tell us a little bit about that. The coolest piece of fruit was we were at there's a there's a street in West Hollywood that has all these gay bars. And we went there one night. I was getting rejected and rejected and rejected. And it was it was awful. And it's actually the video we played on tour. I don't know if you remember watching. Oh, I saw that. Yeah. That young man came up. We're going to put that one in the show notes so you can see it. Go ahead. He came up and he was asking me all the questions about the scriptures concerning homosexuality and explained it to him and shared the love of Jesus with him, prayed for him and God even healed him. Not even just on video. I got a doctor's report that this rare disease he had was gone out of his body. And he gave his life to Jesus the following week and started following Jesus faithfully. That was a sweet piece of fruit. And then on the contrary, there's also hostility. You know, the video that we just came out with guy immediately comes up to me first five minutes of us being at the pride parade and calls me white trash, hateful person. And we started talking and we got on the topic of homosexuality because we're at the pride parade. And the man, he said, I brought up the verse in Leviticus. I said, do you know the verse that comes right after 1822 out of homosexuality? It's about bestiality. So why is it that do you think bestiality is wrong, but you want to say homosexuality is right? Why are they together even though they're two different topics? And he goes, no, bestiality is okay. We should legalize it. This is good. And so that is, that blew me away. I told the guy flat out, I was like, look, I love you, man, but you need to repent because I don't think you just realized what you just said. You said bestiality is okay. And so there's two contrasts, right? You have one extreme of people that are genuinely open to hearing the gospel of Jesus said the harvest is ripe. So there's actually a lot of people that are ready to give their life to Jesus. But then you have the contrary of people that reject it so hard. They're willing to go to an extreme. That's literally a federal crime. That's a federal crime. And he was willing to take it there. And I, you know,

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

Right. Right. Yeah, ours is too, and our donors, thank you, donors, for donating so we could be secure. Do you have a 501(c)(3)? We do. We're a nonprofit organization. So, friends, my friend Bryce here needs some security. So if you're open to helping him out, give to his organization. Where do they go? They go to brycecrawford.org. Brycecrawford.org. Any and all ways to give are all on there. Yeah. By the way, we didn't plan that, ladies and gentlemen. I just think that in today's culture with the hostility that, particularly, sorry, statistically comes mostly from the left, we have to take precautions. And Bryce is very effective. We know that Satan attacks effective people. So if you can help Bryce out, we're going to help you out, Bryce, personally. But I want even our donors to consider giving to Bryce because he's a gem out there doing the Lord's work in places that too few people go. So thank you for what you're doing, Bryce. I know you're going to be out there this month, particularly, so-called Pride Month, at all of these different venues to try and reach the lost. You also have a podcast. Tell us a little bit about the podcast. What do you do on that? So we do two episodes a week right now. We do a Bible teaching episode where we cover a topic or a passage of Scripture at the end of the week. And then on Mondays, we have a conversation that goes up with a guest, whether they're a believer or not. We've talked to everyone across the spectrum of rappers to adult film stars to Christians to non-believers, people in the fitness industry. And we have an episode going up pretty soon with Nicki Minaj where we talk about what faith is like for her and navigating it and how her life has been. So it's been super fun, and it's been cool to see. It's been an encouragement to a ton of people. Now, I've also seen you just did a podcast. I'm about halfway through it with Trent Horn, who is a Roman Catholic apologist. What did you take from that interaction? Well, what I admired about him was he was very knowledgeable with the Scriptures. I mean, he had a lot of Bible memorized, which that always encouraged me. Even if I meet, like, a Hebrew Israelite, I'm like, I don't agree with you, you encourage me to go read my Bible more. Sure. So I definitely did take that away, and it was a cool challenge, and he was super fun to talk to. And he was very knowledgeable. I think the one thing that I thought was very fascinating was he was like, well, yeah, I can't remember if he said this on camera, but he was like, yeah, you know, I do a lot of Catholic apologetics, but, like, I love just apologetics in general. Like, I just love defending the faith. And I just loved, I loved his heart. I loved his heart. I thought he had a great heart. He came to faith through, I think, William Lane Craig, almost. I thought he mentioned that, you know, a Protestant. That's right. He did. He did. Yeah. And I'm not through the entire thing yet, so maybe I'm... He has said this or contradicted it or what, but I remember you asking him, do you think somebody who is a Protestant is going to hell if they're not part of the Catholic Church? And he seemed to say at one point, anyway, that, well, if you're staying out of the Catholic Church because you don't like something about the Catholic Church, like, it's going to change your life, yeah, you would go to hell. He basically said it depends. But what I'm a little confused about is, and maybe Trent can answer this somewhere else, but according to Vatican, or according to original teaching that goes back to about 1300, if you were not part of the Catholic Church, you couldn't get to heaven. But Vatican II came out, you know, in the last century and said that there are separated brethren, so Protestants would be considered separated brethren and could get to heaven. So I'm wondering if he is a Catholic that rejects Vatican II. I haven't followed Trent too much, so I'm just wondering where he is on that. I don't know if that came up later in the conversation. Yeah, I kept it. I kept. I was trying to fully understand his perspective on it because it was always the it depends, you know, and I respected him being careful about the answer. But, you know, as someone that wants to get down to the nitty gritty, I want to know. I want to know really what the ultimate answer is. And so he was very cautious and respectful about it. But I yeah, I still we've we've been talking about that on our side. We were wondering, so was he implying that we don't or does he think we can that we were still in the in that in that area? So it never really came out to a definitive answer. It was all it depends. I'm almost positive. At one point I asked him again. I said, I feel like it's implying that that we don't go to heaven. And it was always a it depends, which I again appreciate him being cautious about it and careful with the answer. But I I can't. I remember leaving the conversation not having a definite to that answer. OK, what what was what were what were some of the things that he maybe changed your mind on, if anything? I always like talking about the Eucharist because I grew up Southern Baptist. So they label it as it's only a symbol. You know, the Catholic perspective of the Eucharist, it's it's like a mortal sin if you don't take it. And it's literally Jesus's body and his literally his blood when you take it. And that's something that I've been diving into just as of lately, especially with all the Orthodox and Catholic content online. And I always appreciate hearing the Catholic perspective of of the Eucharist because I think it's challenging and it's fresh. And it's something that you don't hear typically from the Protestants. Yeah, that's right. Although some Protestants like Lutherans do believe in the real presence. We're talking to my friend Bryce Crawford, ladies and gentlemen. If you don't know about Bryce, you need to know about him. You need to follow him on social media and support him if you can because he's doing great work on the street. He's a street preacher, ladies and gentlemen. Much more with Bryce right after the break. Don't go anywhere back in just a couple. How do you reach the younger generation with the gospel? We're going to talk more about that in this segment with my friend Bryce Crawford. BryceCrawford.org. Is it .com, Bryce, or .org? .org. BryceCrawford.org, ladies and gentlemen. Podcast, YouTube, TikTok, Instagram. He's everywhere. He's doing the Lord's work by going into some hostile places and actually preaching the truth and loving people. It's truth and grace together. So you need to check him out. I've got a couple more questions for Bryce that are going to help you out. Before we do, I want to mention this weekend, let's see, this June 14th, I'll be at Prestonwood Baptist Church in Dallas with my friend Jack Graham. Going to do both services on Sunday. Check our website out for more. Then next Wednesday, we're going to do the Bible You Never Knew at Central Church of God here in Charlotte, North Carolina. It starts at 7 o'clock. It will. I don't know if it's going to be live stream. Maybe not live stream. But if you're in the area, you can see it. And then I'm going to be in Charleston, South Carolina at an event on Friday. You can see the details on our website. And don't forget, we just launched at least the PR portion of the new book, The War on Reality. It doesn't come out until September, but my friend Phoenix Hayes and I put this book together because, as you might imagine, there's a lot of misinformation out there on the internet about what really is true, not only about identity and economics and Christianity and the family, but there are attacks on reality. Can you respond? The War on Reality will help you do it. The subtitle is Recovering Truth in a World That Celebrates Lies. And if you pre-order a paperback copy of the book, we're going to send you now one of my favorite chapters, chapter 10. That's about Marxism. Is everybody oppressed? And we're also going to sign you up for a live Q&A Zoom session with me and my co-author Phoenix, which will happen the week the book comes out, September 8th, just two days prior to the anniversary of Charlie's murder. In fact, the first chapter is about that day. So check out The War on Reality. Let me go back to my friend. By the way, thewaronreality.com is the book. thewaronreality.com. But let me go to my friend Bryce Crawford. Bryce, when you're doing all of these events and you're mixing it up with people you know who are hostile to Christianity, how much apologetics do you have to use? How often or how important is apologetics to what you do? Apologetics is extremely important because if I go up and make a claim about their lifestyle or their belief system and I don't have proof to back it up, then I look just as bad as they do when they say something about me with no proof. And so I love what you said earlier, truth and grace. It's a combination. Too much truth, no grace crushes the person. And I've done that before. And all grace, no truth, just compromises for the sin of that person. And I've also done that out of fear before. And

### 00:40:00 - 00:49:13

Love them all, also calling them higher, and apologetics equips you with the tools necessary. What does 1 Peter say about it? Be prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks for the hope inside of you with gentleness and respect. And I love, I love that verse. Yeah, earlier in the year, you were in our course, Why I Still Don't Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist, and it was great having you in there. And I'm glad you've been able to use some of this when you go into the lion's den as you do. And hopefully, we're going to get you on some college campuses coming up here as well. That's going to be fabulous to do because not only do the young people in high school need to see what you're doing, but the young people in college need to see what you're doing as well. So we're going to do whatever we can to help you do that. And you're bringing the truth to very hostile venues, and you're speaking to people who are so hardened. They've actually, you can just see it in what they're wearing and how they're carrying themselves. Here is a clip with you praying for a very hardened atheist, and he literally breaks down as you're praying for him. Check this out. Can I pray for you? Can I let me cover you? Jesus, thank you for Atrophy, God. We just thank you that you love him, that you've shown up to him right now, God. We just ask that your love may surpass all understanding right now. You're the Prince of Peace, Jesus. Will you just come into his heart right now and just fill him with comfort, God? Let him know that you are here and that you see him. God, I thank you for bringing us together. This is no coincidence, God, that we ran into him, that he's made time to meet together and talk about you. Jesus, I pray that he encourages many others. God, we just bless him. I pray that he feel encouraged today and loved. God, we thank you for his life and his heart. We thank you that you see him and that you restore all things. You make things new in you. We thank you that all wickedness was killed on the cross, God, and that through you, we have redemption for sinful world. We thank you that there is redemption for my life and Atrophy's life in you, God. We just bless him. We thank you for your comfort and peace. Bless you in Jesus' name. Amen. I love you, bro. Bryce, he called himself Atrophy, which probably represented how he felt that his world was just falling in on itself, on himself. You were able to pray with him. Can you tell us the backstory of that and what happened? We ran into him on the street the day before, and he was running somewhere. But I was like, look, man, I still want to have a conversation with you. You're on my heart. So I got his phone number. And then he met up with us the next day. He actually followed through. So that showed us that he actually wanted to talk. And God really met him where he was at. Kept in touch with him for a while. This is cool. I lost contact with him on his phone number. I couldn't get in contact with him. I think maybe two weeks ago, someone sends me a YouTube video of him getting baptized. And he's going in on his faith, and he got baptized at a church a couple weeks ago trying to be bold and vocal about his faith. And who would have known full circle, we would have just let that guy walk away. Wow, that's amazing. If there is a video out there of that, send it to me and we'll put it in the show notes. If you have it, Bryce. I don't know if you do. I'll get the YouTube link and I'll send it to you. Yeah, yeah. I mean, that was amazing. And you've prayed with all sorts of people. You prayed with a Satanist. That's on your way. How did that come about? I was driving down the street and I looked over out the window and I saw this guy hanging out outside the library. And I hit a U-turn in the streets of LA, which is very difficult to do with all the traffic there. I did it. And we talked to him. And we actually found out that, and this is one of those hostile cases, he let us pray for him that one time. He told us his name was Chad. Then a couple months later, some guy in LA that watches our videos hits us up on Instagram and says, hey, he's sleeping underneath the 405 bridge in this city that we lived really close to. So we drove over there one night and found him sleeping under the bridge. And we offered him help. And he said he didn't want anything from us Christians. Didn't want a meal. Didn't want a hotel room. Didn't want help or anything. And we made an attempt to follow up with him some more. This is cool. I've lost contact with him on his phone number. I couldn't get in contact with him. I think maybe two weeks ago, someone sends me a YouTube video of him getting baptized. And he's going in on his faith and he got baptized at a church a couple of weeks ago trying to be bold and vocal about his faith. And who would have known full circle we would have just let that guy walk away. Wow, that's amazing. If there is a video out there of that, send it to me. We'll put it in the show notes if you have it, Bryce. I don't know if you do, but I'll get the YouTube link and I'll send it to you. Yeah, yeah. I mean, that was amazing. And you've prayed with all sorts of people. You prayed with a Satanist. That's on your way. How did that come about? I was driving down the street and I looked over out the window and I saw this guy hanging out outside the library. And I hit a U-turn in the streets of LA, which is very difficult to do with all the traffic there. I did it. And we talked to him. And we actually found out that, and this is one of those hostile cases, he let us pray for him that one time. He told us his name was Chad. Then a couple months later, some guy in LA that watches our videos hits us up on Instagram and says, hey, he's sleeping underneath the 405 bridge in this city that we lived really close to. So we drove over there one night and found him sleeping under the bridge. And we offered him help. And he said he didn't want anything from us Christians. Didn't want a meal. Didn't want a hotel room. Didn't want help or anything. And we made an attempt to, you know, follow up with him some more. And he just rejected it. I tried texting him and he ignored me, calling him and ignoring me, but, but that was still fun talking to him. And, you know, we can't help it if people don't want the help. No, that's why the question, if Christianity were true, would you become a Christian? Many of them will say no. Right. Because they think they want something more than God. Oftentimes it's just their autonomy or they're mad at God. We get that. Yeah. But I mean, you, you claimed to be mad at God when your grandfather died, right? Absolutely. Yeah. And I think that's just an honest, if you are mad at God, at least be honest about it, you know, you can, that, that's the only way. What does Jesus say? Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. The reward for being honest with God is more of him. So maybe we need to be more honest about God, even if the emotions feel off or it feels weird to feel some way, you know, and it's very helpful to navigate faith. Okay. There's somebody watching right now, Bryce, who is trying to reach out to an unbeliever, a young person. Give, give them an insight as to how they should try and do that. The ministry of presence does so much more than telling someone how to get out of the hole that they're in. Like sometimes if you've ever been in a hole and you're just like, I don't want you to tell me how to get out of it. I just want you to be with me. And it's like one of those things where when we just show up for people, it makes them go, why are you here? Why do you constantly seek after me? So being in pursuit of people out of love is going to, you know, what does, what does James 1 say? True religion that is undefiled before the Lord is visiting widows and orphans in their affliction, like actually serving these people. And then ultimately just literally asking conversations like, do you have a faith? Where are you at with Jesus? Invite these guys to church. It's, it's far easier than we make it out to be as complex in our brain. Like we make it be like this, this impossible mathematical formula that is, seems so impossible for us to achieve or accomplish. Or I don't know how to start the conversation. Just ask out of love. When you love the person, it's not awkward. And that, that'll be a big game changer. So I know you, you've probably been rejected a lot of times. How do you deal with that? Well, I, I wiped the dust off my feet and go to the next person. And it's as simple as that, friends. No problem. You know, it can be hurtful. Sometimes people say something that stings a little bit. It's okay. You know, my, my prayer has always been, God, give me thick skin, but a soft heart. I don't want to grow cold to people,
