# Why Does Jesus List Heart, Soul, and Mind Separately?

- Publication date: 2026-05-13
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/7ff90c25-7b87-394f-9ba5-6970d88ce636`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Well, welcome to the show, friends. Greg Kokel here for Stand to Reason, and today we have an open mic day. I'm off schedule, and so I'm taking a series of calls that you leave online for me for times like this. And if you are thinking about asking a question or raising an issue or anything like that and can't get in during the regular show time, which is live for me on Tuesdays from 4 until 6 p.m. Los Angeles time, then you can use this as an option, and whenever you want, you can go to our homepage, str.org, and under podcasts, find live podcasts, and you can leave a recording of your question, and that's what we go through here. And eventually I get to them. It does take me a while sometimes, and my apologies, but I generally try to go with the oldest calls first, first in, first out kind of thing. So that's what I'm going to do today. And during the regular show, you can dial in at 855-243-9975, and that would be from 4 to 6 on Tuesdays, LA time, but the other times, just go to the website, str.org, and leave your open mic call there under podcasts and live broadcasts. So we've got a couple here. Actually, the first two look like they're from the same person, but that's all right. Rock and roll here, Johnny. Let's see what's on your mind, Johnny, today. Hello, Greg. This is Johnny from just outside of Richmond, Virginia. I'm a strategic partner. I appreciate everything you guys are doing there. Thank you. My question for you is in regards to Mark 12, verse 29 through 31. What's the difference between the heart, soul, mind, and strength? Strength seems intuitive to me, you know, that is the body's physical abilities. However, heart, soul, and mind all seem to blend to me. I tend to think about the heart in respect to this passage, not just as an organ that pumps blood, but as the seat of our emotions. And likewise, I'm thinking of the mind, not just as the brain, but as consciousness. And I would consider both the heart and the mind, as I just described them, to be attributes of the soul. So what is the intention of Jesus enlisting these items separately? I would assume I'm misunderstanding the heart, mind, and soul to some degree, or perhaps Jesus is addressing folks who don't believe in the afterlife, and so he's emphasizing the existence of the soul. Anyways, I would love to know your thoughts, Greg. Thank you. You're welcome, Johnny. And I think you've done a pretty good job here. Jesus is making a statement about thoroughly, completely, unreservedly loving God. And so he's just citing all of these different elements, summing up one point, and that is all of you. That is, everything that is you ought to be loving God. And then he makes some distinctions here, as you pointed out, heart, soul, mind, strength. That's all in the passage here, but just one small correction. We understand the heart as the seat of the emotions now. So when we say, I love you with all my heart, we are expressing a statement about how we feel. But in those times, the word heart did not entail the motions. In fact, I think the reference for emotions was the bowels, that is, the stomach area, and not the heart the way we talk about it. But it's easy to read our notion back in there, because this is the way we discuss it now. So I think what Jesus is saying is the heart is the center of the person, the whole person. And as it says here in Mark 12, where you're citing, let me just find the exact citation here, 29 through 31. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, and, verse 30, you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, with all your strength. So this is almost a little bit, excuse me, hyperbolic. You know, he's just using this full-orbed characterization. I think you're right about strength in the sense that, generally, strength refers to some physical quality, but I actually don't think it refers to that here, because there's no sense in which I love God with all my muscles, my physical strength. I think he's talking about an emotional intensity. Now, and so, therefore, he's grouping these things together. Now, how do we understand what it means to be human, or what it means to be a human being? What's the metaphysics of being human? And I think, simply, it can be characterized with two things. There is a physical self, and there is a non-physical self. The physical self is our physical body, but the physical self cannot be the center of our identity, because we, ourselves, continue to exist after the body is gone. So when we die, ourselves, our immaterial selves, sometimes referred to as the soul, sometimes referred to scripturally now as the mind, sometimes referred to as the spirit, leaves or is disunited with our body, and it has a separate individual existence. And so, the body can go away, and the body will be returned at the resurrection, but ourselves remain, our immaterial selves. So I hold to the view that humans are dualistic. They have a physical element, and they have an immaterial element, and it's the immaterial element, maybe call it the soul or the mind or the spirit, that is the seat of our identity and allows us to remain ourselves even though our physical bodies change with time. This is what identifies ourself, or what our ego, ourself, is attached to, if you will, our immaterial self. So the immaterial self, the soul, if you will, the mind, has different capacities. It does different things. It thinks, it feels, it makes decisions. There is a capacity to connect with God in a personal way, and usually when the Scripture is talking about the spirit, it is talking about that quality or that capability or that capacity that we have to connect with God. It's not talking about a different substance, a totally distinct thing. We're not body, soul, and spirit. I mean, I don't even know what that would even look like. Where am I in the process in that three-part breakdown? Well, I'm certainly not in my body because I'll exist after my body is gone. Paul said he was taken up to the second heaven, whether in the body or outside of the body, he didn't know, but it makes it clear there in that passage that he wasn't his body, all right, because he could have gone up without his body. So that's the immaterial self, but then if you say then there's also the spirit, which is a separate thing, the question I would ask is, where are you then? Are you in the soul or are you in the spirit? That doesn't seem to make much sense. It seems like what Scripture is characterizing human beings as, are as not a three-part being, but a two-part being, body and soul, and the soul has different capacities, spiritual capacities, the ability to think, the ability to make decisions, to feel emotion. All of these are capacities or capabilities that the soul has. Now, capacities are not always realized. Being human means you have innate capabilities to do certain things, soulish behaviors. That doesn't mean you're always able to exemplify them at any given time. When you're being formed in the womb, you certainly have a body developing,

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

And you have a soul that is there as well, because the soul is where all of these functions or experiences of sentience take place. So if you're deciding to move around and you're feeling the warmth of your mother's womb or you're hearing sounds, all of these things are soulish behaviors. And so there's a soul there, there's a body and a soul, but the capacities of the soul are not realized. You have the capacity to learn a language, but you don't speak a language when you're in the womb. More has to happen in the physical body to develop to the point where the soulish quality can be manifest through the physical body. And some physical bodies, unfortunately, never develop enough for certain capacities to be realized. And so we have congenital defect, et cetera, et cetera, but it doesn't mean the capacity is not there. So I think the best way to understand what Jesus' intention is here, Johnny, is that he is saying that we ought to love God with everything that we have, our whole selves. Now, that's not really possible. I chuckle because I did write in The Story of Reality, I said, I don't, there's never been a single moment in my entire existence that I've ever satisfied this requirement. When Jesus is talking about the two greatest commandments, love God and love your neighbors yourself, love God in the way we were just discussing it, he is saying this is the demand of moral perfection. And good luck with that if that is the means by which we are finding acceptance with God. But it's interesting, in this particular passage, there's a scribe that asks Jesus, what is the foremost of them all? And this is the response that Jesus gave, the one we've been talking about. Now, as I understand it, the reason that the Jewish leadership was asking what's the greatest is because the burden of the commandments is so great. You can't keep them all, no matter how hard you try. So let's just really focus on the most important ones, and that was a matter of debate. Which one is the most important one that we can really focus on, major in the majors? Now, they all mattered. But when Jesus was asked this particular question, this is what he responded with. Okay, you want a simple commandment, the greatest? Love God this way, with everything, heart, mind, soul, strength, which is like impossible. Now, there was someone, let me just see if it's this section or not. No, in the other, in the other, in the parallel passage or one of the other occasions where this issue came up, the great commandments, and Jesus also said, love your neighbor as yourself, one of the scribes in the text says, seeking to justify himself, in other words, he wanted to see whether he's able to keep these laws adequately to be self-justified. And when Jesus made the comment about the first great commandment, apparently he thought he must have fulfilled that. And so when he heard the second, he asked, who is my neighbor? And this is where Jesus tells the parable of the good Samaritan. And that parable was told not for the reason of providing a morality parable about how we ought to live. It doesn't tell how we ought to live. But that isn't why Jesus responded then, because the text says, seeking to justify himself, he asks, who is my neighbor? So Jesus essentially says, your neighbor is your worst enemy. You know, put that in your pipe and smoke a kind of thing. Point being, there is no way you're going to justify yourself in either of these commandments if we just take the entire law and reduce it to two concepts. The law still destroys us. We can't keep it. And I think that's the point. All the different ways Jesus is characterizing of ourselves and what we should love with, I think these are all, he's saying everything, all of you, all your capacities, name one, they're all in there, heart, soul, mind, strength. And their strength is not physical strength. It's with the full commitment of all of these things. And this is, you know, this is impossible. This isn't going to happen. And this is an example of what Paul talks about in the book of Galatians, that the law is a tutor to drive us to Christ. If we understand the law properly, then we are going to understand how completely incapable we are to fulfilling that law. So, Johnny, I hope that helps. I know you have another question and having to do with who the Bible was written for and how do we interpret it, etc. So let's hear about that one, John. Hey, Greg, this is Johnny from just outside of Richmond, Virginia. I'm a strategic partner and love everything you guys are doing there at STR. My question for you is, was the Bible written for lay people or does it need to be interpreted by people with scholarly or divine knowledge? I'm part of a Christian men's group and just heard this basic question coming from one of our leaders. The leader was arguing for the idea that the Bible is for lay people and needs no mediators, perhaps thinking of the Catholic Church, or needs no outside knowledge to understand it. While I understand his concern and the slippery slope he is trying to guard people against, I think he takes it too far. He brings up concern about even using historical context, as he considers this an extra biblical source of information. He says historical context can be good if it agrees with the layperson's plain understanding of the text, but if the historical context completely changes the meaning from what the layperson understands, then you've now entered that slippery slope of needing someone else to interpret the Bible for you. One example he gave was, if the Bible says do not resist an evil person or turn the other cheek, but you've developed an intellectual maneuver so you can say it actually means the opposite, especially if your reasoning involves some sort of historical knowledge of some custom of slapping people with the backs of hands, then you're implying that it's not sufficient for a person to simply read the Bible. You're implying that you have to also know this extra knowledge and that the author failed to explain that important part to you. I would love to know your thoughts on this, Greg. Thank you. Yeah, Johnny, thank you. This is a very good question and it's a very frustrating answer. There is a fairly straightforward answer to this, but it's not going to be satisfying to your friend, I suspect. But there actually is a quick way to show if your friend is open to demonstrate that he's thinking about this in the wrong way. So you guys have a group, a group of men that are studying the Bible. I presume, given this is somewhere outside of Richmond, Virginia, that you are reading an English Bible. The Bible was not written in English. It was written in Greek. But your friend doesn't speak Greek, presumably, nor do you, nor do most people studying the Bible. In order to figure out what the Bible is communicating to us, it has to be translated by somebody who knows Greek. Not just any Greek, but a specific kind of Greek, the Greek that was spoken by the average fellow back 2,000 years ago in ancient Palestine, and this is called koine Greek. So your friend is at a serious disadvantage to press this point, because even to study at all, he's got to go somewhere else to get information that makes the text readable to him. If his concern is the Bible is written just for ordinary folk, which I think is true, and therefore you don't need any other cultural information whatsoever to understand it, then he can't even start unless he learns Greek and reads from the Greek New Testament. Because on his idea, you can't, it's written for the layperson and the ordinary person should be able to understand it, and any additional help is somehow illicit and not adequate to that person. Well, for goodness sake, if it's written in a language you don't understand, you need help, right? And if it's written about circumstances that you don't understand, but the original people did, then you need to understand some of those circumstances to get the accurate sense of the thing. And that's what he's objecting to, it seems to me. Now, the simple answer to the basic question, was the Bible written for ordinary folk or does it require people with theological degrees, etc.?

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

that's actually like maybe, you know, the Roman Catholic Church interpreting it for you, and there is a sense in which sometimes that point is made. Well, the Bible was written in Koine Greek. That is the Greek of the commoner, not Attic Greek, which is high Greek, but rather the language of the common people. Not only that, these were letters written by some people or accounts, in the case of the Gospels and the book of Acts, by one person to another. So, for example, when Luke opens up his Gospel, he says, Hey, you know, a lot of people have written about Jesus, and I'm writing to you, O excellent Theophilus, so that you will understand these particular points. Now, I have no reason to think that Theophilus was a theologian. He was an ordinary guy hearing about Jesus, and Luke says, Let me tell you in an orderly fashion about Jesus. So, I imagine Theophilus was qualified to read and understand what was being said in the Gospel of Luke. And this is true with all of the Gospels, and in fact, when it comes to other New Testament books, they were written by one person to another person or another group or another region. So, if Paul is writing to Timothy, it seems common sense that Paul would understand what, I'm sorry, Timothy would understand what Paul was writing, or Titus is another example, or when he writes to the Corinthians, that's a church in the city of Corinth, that is dealing with very particular things, and he's addressing those things. Do you think the Corinthians understood what Paul was saying, or were they going, Hey, man, is there a priest around here somewhere that can read this for us? Because it's an absolute mystery to us. No, he wrote for their individual understanding. And to the Galatians, that's a region, all right? So, these are pieces written for the ordinary person of that time to understand in the context of the circumstances they were facing. It's just like any other letter. If I'm reading a letter written by a soldier on the western front in the Second World War back to his wife, it may be that there's a number of things I don't understand based on what he's describing as taking place because I don't understand the military language of that battle. But his wife would understand it because a lot of people are following in the newspaper. So, somebody might need to explain to me, for example, what some of these terms mean. But, of course, it was written by the author to have his wife understand it and it was not too hard for her because she understood the circumstances. Now, if I'm reading and I said, Hey, what's the deal with the hedgehog? What's a hedgehog? It's like that animal? No, it's not a hedgehog. Hedgehog is not an animal. Hedgehog is that big barred thing that they have on the beach to keep the landing boats from landing on D-Day, those big cross things. That's the hedgehog. Oh, now I understand. But, by the way, the fact that somebody explains to me what a hedgehog is on the beach, the landing beaches of Normandy, doesn't mean you can't jump from there to say, well, this guy wrote it just for the experts in military blah, blah, blah. No, it's just that there was common knowledge about things back then, especially in that circumstance, that we don't have necessarily now. And if you get the little of the lingo and whatever, you'll understand what's being said. And that's exactly what we face with Scripture. Although we're not talking about an event that happened 85 years ago or whatever it is, the storming of the beaches at Normandy, but rather what happened 2,000 years ago and not in English but originally in Greek in a culture very foreign to ours. And they're going to be making statements that don't make any sense to us. Jacob I loved and Esau I hated. God hates people. That's not what he means. It turns out this was a figure of speech that the people at the time understood. Yeah, doesn't he tell us to love him and hate our children and our wives and our husbands and our family members? The Bible is teaching to hate. No, you're misunderstanding the intention of the author. And if you were in the sandals of the first century people that were receiving this straightforward characterization of something that Jesus said, then you would understand it too like they did. And so, on the one hand, it is true that the Bible is written for the common person to understand, but the common person it was written to was the common person who spoke Greek 2,000 years ago in the context of a culture and dealing with all kinds of particular problems. And if you're foreign to that language or that culture or those problems, then you're going to have to bone up a little bit on the circumstances to be able to get the plain sense of some of these things. Now, just with regards to Jesus turning the other cheek, it is interesting, and I think there is a fair claim that can be made, that when he says, Turn the other cheek, and the description of it, he is not talking about if somebody is trying to kill you, you lay down and let them kill you. Or do anything bad to you, you just open up and let them do bad to you. That isn't what Jesus had in mind. In fact, Jesus was struck on the cheek during his arrest and trial. And when he, the author of this statement, was struck on the cheek, he did not turn the other cheek. He didn't practice what he preached. He said, If I have done wrong, then bear witness to the wrong. And if not, then why did you strike me? In other words, he held the person accountable for their action. He didn't just turn the other cheek, which suggests that maybe just turning cheeks when violence is present isn't exactly what Jesus had in mind. And I think that's a fair critique of that view. And by the way, yeah, there are some times when there are theological notions that the Jewish people understood because of their own training that we don't understand. And so, we have to kind of get in the sandals, the mental thinking also of the recipients in order to get the plain, fairly simple truth the way it was presented to them. And sometimes you've got more detail that's even more difficult. I have a whole course I teach called The Bible Fast Forward, and what I'm trying to do is bring people up to date on the development of the history of Israel and the contracts or the covenants like the Abrahamic and the Mosaic and the new covenant that are spoken of in the New Testament that Gentiles nowadays have no understanding of. And so, I'm trying to bring people up to speed with an understanding that the rank and file that Jesus spoke to and Paul wrote to, in many cases, understood. So, I agree in principle that the Bible was written for the ordinary person, and in a certain sense, we should be able to read it and get the basics. The Reformers called that the perspicuity of Scripture, the plain things are the main things kind of deal. But then there are other things that are a little more difficult, and the difficulty is compounded because we are so far removed from the time and the language and the customs of those people. And consequently, we're going to get it wrong. And if we insist on just reading the words and thinking that the impression that we get from the words we read is the accurate one because it's just speaking in simple terms that we all should get, then we are naive. And even though I agree with the notion in general that it was written for the common person, we are so far removed from the circumstances of the people that it was written to that sometimes we need more help to understand the plain sense common meaning of the text as it was given to the original readers. So, like I said, I'm frustrated by this kind of question because the person who's making the point, Johnny, that you're dealing with, has a point, but he's not properly taking into consideration a whole bunch of other factors that must be taken into consideration before you can get a sound understanding.

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

Understanding of the text. And the fact that he's reading in English instead of in Greek, it ought to be the first indicator that all of us need a little help from the outside because we don't speak that language. My fear is that that will not be an adequate explanation to your friend and they're going to persist in reading what they think the plain sense meaning is and then get it wrong a lot because they are not taking into consideration this other element. Anyway, there you go, Johnny. Thank you for your questions. Let's take a break and we'll be back with more of your questions when I return on Stand to Reason. Friends, if you like this broadcast, I know you'll love Hashtag STR Ask. It's our shorter 20-minute podcast where I am paired with the wonderful Amy Hall, and together we answer the questions you send us on Twitter. Hashtag STR Ask is released twice a week, Mondays and Thursdays, and it's only about 20 minutes long, so it's perfect to listen to on your morning jog, or while driving around running errands, or cleaning your garage, or just plain loafing at home. Amy and I tackle your questions on theology and ethics and culture and lots more, offering our insight on the questions you're asking or the challenges you face. You can listen on Apple Podcasts or wherever you download your own shows. Just remember, send us your questions on Twitter using the name of the podcast, Hashtag STR Ask. That's Hashtag STR Ask. As a high school teacher, I always had a red pen close at hand. When I wasn't in front of my students teaching a lesson, you could find me assessing assignments, grading essays, and evaluating exams. The red pen played a crucial role in the educational development of my students. With it, I questioned their assumptions, exposed their errors, and challenged them to think critically. You see, a good teacher doesn't merely tell his students that they're wrong. A good teacher shows his students why they're wrong so they don't make the same mistakes twice. He corrects because he cares. Last year, I was scrolling through social media and frankly, I was discouraged at all the bad thinking that undergirded much of what I was reading. Then it hit me. What if someone applied the red pen to this flawed thinking? And Red Pen Logic with Mr. B was born. In the last few months, Red Pen Logic has grown in popularity. Through our engaging and shareable educational graphics and videos, we are helping people, especially young people, assess bad thinking by using good thinking. And we have a lot of fun in the process. So here's your homework assignment. Like the Red Pen Logic Facebook page so you don't miss our next graphic. And subscribe at the Red Pen Logic YouTube channel so you don't miss a single video. Class dismissed. All righty. Now this next question is from Noel. And that would be the French spelling. I know that because that's my daughter's middle name with the same N-O-E-L-L-E spelling. So this is a question I've actually heard before, but I am a little bit mystified by why some people are taken with this concern. Not Noel. She's been asked the question. She wants to hear my response. But let's go to that first and then we'll chat about it. Noel? Hi, Greg. Hi there. Thank you for your show and your ministry. I listen to you almost every single day. Oh, great. And I have a question that you may or may not be able to give an answer to. I'm a hairstylist and, believe it or not, I actually have some really interesting conversations with some of my clients and I'm trying to be more brave about engaging in conversations. I read tactics and street smarts, loved them both. And tonight I had a conversation with a client. He started talking about the ancient pyramids and space and time and that sort of stuff, which is a little over my head. But he made mention that he thinks that this life is maybe a simulation. And he made reference to the movie The Matrix. I don't know if you've seen that. It's been years for me. But essentially that this life isn't really real and one may have an experience that's different than another even when they're having that same experience. And so he asked me to tell him something that can happen in this life that couldn't happen in a simulation. And I said, I don't think that there is anything that couldn't be simulated in this life. And I said, maybe in the sense that there is life beyond this life, that there is eternal life, this life may be thought of as a simulation in that way. But then he said, well, now you're just trying to get religion into this and blah, blah, blah. So anyways, I just wanted to know if you're still tracking at this point, what you thought arguments from a biblical worldview could be against the fact or against the thought that this life is a simulation. Thanks, Greg. And I appreciate everything you do. And hopefully you answer this question. Thank you, Noel. And this is, I'm chuckling here a little bit because this is kind of a version of the professor's ploy. You might remember from the tactics book where there is a reversal of the burden of proof. Okay. So your friend here is making kind of garish, bizarre claims, at least about the possibility. And now he is asking you to prove him wrong. And if you start bringing in any spiritual things, then he's just dismissive of that. Oh, that's just religion. The irony is, is he's just, he's just kind of fabricated a fantasy as a real possibility. The Matrix is not reality. It's Hollywood. Now, someone might say, oh, yeah, well, how do you know that? Give me a proof otherwise. What, what couldn't, tell me any part of life that couldn't actually happen in a simulation. And my response is virtually every aspect of life cannot be reproduced in simulation. It can be reproduced as a story, part of a storyline in Hollywood, but not in real life. It's just, it's just goofy. Well, what you're thinking and doing right now could be reproduced in a simulation. Really? Yeah. How do you know? Because I saw it in a movie. What would make anybody think that any of the details of this life could actually be reproduced in this compelling way so that we would all be thinking it's real when it's not, it's just a simulation. Well, there's the only reason anyone would think that is because they saw a movie with Keanu Reeves called The Matrix. That's the only reason somebody would believe that. There, there is a, there is a self-presenting, now I'm going to talk a little more philosophically. There is a self-presenting quality to reality that, that has a certain kind of incorrigible aspect to it. In other words, when I say incorrigible, I mean that it's not possible to be mistaken. Now I don't mean that you could never be mistaken on an individual thing. You might have misheard something or not seen something accurately or whatever. I mean, lots of little mistakes in perception happen. But to say that we are all part of a simulation is to say every single detail of our perception is part of a simulation. That means we'd have to presume that we have no direct, accurate access to reality to be able to judge when something's real and when something's not real. Now, I know this is a little, may sound tricky to some, but I'm just going to stand on this because I, I don't have patience for people who see a movie and then say, where, prove to me that we're not in the movie. It's not like that. Well, here, I know it isn't because I'm experiencing my whole life right here. Well, that's not proof. Well, you have to show me differently because the evidence of my senses and my experience is so completely compelling that I am in touch with reality, even though I'm not perfectly in touch with reality, that I have no reason whatsoever to believe that this is all a simulation, that I'm in The Matrix. Now, Richard Swinburne, a British philosopher, I think he's still alive, and I think he's a believer, not relevant.

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

It doesn't seem relevant so much to my point, but he made an observation about epistemology or knowledge, how we know what we know. And he formulated what he calls the principle of credulity. Now, because I'm telling you that Richard Swinburne formulated the principle, and the principle has a name, principle of credulity, it kind of makes it sound really official. I'm just giving him credit for stating something that's obvious, okay? Like Aristotle, when he talked about the nature of truth, what truth means, he said, if you say that it is and it is, or you say that it isn't and it isn't, that's true. Aristotle got credited for that. But it's like, duh, so obvious. So what is the principle of credulity? Here's the principle. Things are the way they seem to be unless you have really good reason to think otherwise. Let me say that again. Things are the way that you seem to be unless you have good reason to believe otherwise. I saw a Steven Wright monologue once, some of you know him. If you go online, you can find him. He's my age now. He's an ancient guy, but he's funny, especially when he was younger. Deadpan. And he talked about when you take a pencil and you stick it in a glass of water, it looks like it bends. You know that? Yeah. He said, that's why I never take baths. That's a funny line. He doesn't want his leg to bend like that. Well, sometimes we see things that don't look right, but we know better. We have some faculty to repair the distortion of a sense perception. Your leg's not bending, it's just the light is bending. And so, like Swinburne has put it, things are as they seem to be unless we have good reason to believe otherwise. So it seems like the pencil is bending, but we know it's not. We pull it out, it's not bent. Put it in, it's bent. Something else is going on. And the same thing is true with all of life. Every movement we make, every thing that we eat, every place that we go, every decision that we are involved with, all presumes that to be the case. And consequently, when we're at least attending to the way things actually are or appear to be, it works out great because our perceptions of where they are are accurate. Oh, maybe it's all part of the simulation. No, it's not. Okay, give me a good reason why you think it's all part of a simulation. Don't just say maybe, because maybe doesn't get you anything. It's possible that doesn't get you anything. We're not asking about maybes. We're not talking about possibilities. We're talking about actualities, what we have good reason to believe. Now, I don't think, Noel, that the customer that you had this conversation with, I mean, I would be, I would suspect he doesn't actually believe that. I think he's just toying around with ideas and having fun. And it's easy to talk about this, but after he's done, after he's done with his haircut or whatever, then he goes home, he gets in his car, and he makes all his decisions based on being part of reality and his perceptions being sound and not part of a simulation. And he's not going to do, the reflection that maybe it's possible this is all simulation is not going to deter him from any of his meaningful behaviors because he doesn't think it is a simulation because he has no reason to believe it is. And the only reason somebody might think it's possible is because they saw a movie. Okay, I saw Lord of the Rings. So, but I don't, I don't think hobbits actually exist. And on and on and on, we could go with examples. So there you go, Noel. That's the best I could. Principle of credulity, Richard Swinburne. Let's hear from Steve here. She's got a question about, or he does, about Erica Kirk. Do we have that one, Kyle? Hello, Greg. This is Steve. I'm sorry. Yeah, there are actually two questions that are kind of connected. So let's hear from, thank you, Amy, for, you know, drawing my attention to this. Let's hear from Steve, then we'll hear from Tom. Do you have Tom's? Tom listener, first-time caller. Okay, good. My question is, question slash comment, is regarding Erica Kirk. And I love her. I want to start off by saying I think she's a great woman, but, and I don't want to say anything too negative about her views, but I think this is too important to pass up. In Luke 17, 3 and 4, Jesus said very clearly that forgiving people ought to be conditioned upon their repentance. In other words, if they refuse to repent, we ought not to forgive them. Despite that, she said she forgives Charlie's murderer. That strikes me as a mistake. Unfortunately, for a long time, we've had a steady stream of sloppy agape-type pastors and teachers who want to ignore that requirement and pretend everybody can just forgive each other into a glorious utopia without any repentance. I've noticed that the wolves in sheep's clothing that slip into church from time to time have a tendency to take advantage of the people who think this way. And it also occurs to me that turn the other cheek should never apply to the machinations of the justice system. As I believe you have taught before, that notion applies to certain interpersonal interactions we may have, but turn the other cheek was not supposed to be applied to any governmental operations. If you disagree with this, I'd love to hear why. Either way, I'd love to hear your thoughts on it. Thanks and God bless you. All right, take care. Okay, Steve, thank you for that. And Tom also has a similar kind of question. I'll take them both together, so let's hear from Tom. Hey, Greg, Tom Pointner calling again. I just want to say thank you for your comments about the Charlie Kirk killing. You're always measured and thoughtful, and I appreciate the way that you communicate. I listened to Erica Kirk's very public display of Christian forgiveness at Charlie's memorial service, and it made me think, I don't know if the killer has made a statement expressing sorrow for what he did, and if not, my question is, how are we supposed to think about forgiveness? I don't believe that Christ's forgiveness extends to the unrepentant, and if that's the case, and if we're asked to be like Jesus, does that mean that we are not supposed to forgive those who wrong us or someone we love if they're not sorry about it? Now, if I'm wrong and Jesus does forgive everyone but only pardons the contrite, then I've got a problem because I always thought that forgiveness and pardon were intertwined, at least biblically. But if we aren't called to forgive people who aren't sorry for what they've done, then what do we make of Jesus' comments on the cross asking God the Father to forgive those who crucified him even though they weren't sorry? And one more thing, lastly, how can our own souls move on and heal from being wronged if we don't forgive, regardless if the one who hurt us is remorseful or not? Now, I'm sure you've probably commented on this issue in the past, but it's an important one and this seems like a good opportunity to readdress this topic of forgiveness. Thanks, Greg. Look forward to your comments. Wow, thank you, Tom and Steve. This is a kind of a challenging issue. You both brought up a number of angles to this question. And just as an aside, Jesus forgiving those who crucified him, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. Let me just take that by itself, okay? It strikes me this is a really odd prayer. It has unusual theological consequences. But keep in mind here that this particular verse is a variant. And in other words, there are a number of texts that exist that do not have that prayer in there. And my understanding is this textual variant is not well supported. So there is some question as to whether Jesus ever said that. And part of the problem is, if they don't know what they're doing, then how could it be a sin that needs forgiveness? That's one question. I think there may be some answers to that. But then the other one is, how is it that Jesus prays a prayer if his prayer isn't answered? So those people get forgiven even apart from any action of their own towards God. That's like a theological problem. And so for some of these reasons, I'm not convinced that that is a sound translation or that verse is reliable. So having said that, I'm going to set that aside. I think there is another difficulty, though, in this whole thing about forgiveness. And to be honest, I have trouble working through it myself because we do have these texts that seem to indicate clearly that if they repent, forgive—70 times 7, right? But would that mean, too, that they repent

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

And then they go back 70 times 7 to use Jesus' hyperbole or his exaggeration for the sake of effect. So there does seem to be that element there. And in fact, if we don't, even before God, taking our sinfulness before God and acknowledging it, having an attitude that's God's attitude about it, and I think that's part of what the repentance means. It doesn't mean we're never going to sin anymore, but it's a requirement for our forgiveness before God. And so there's a lot of things going on here. All to say first, I think there's reasonable confusion here. There's reasonable confusion. Now, Steve, what you suggested a little bit that maybe people with bad motives are manipulating others with this particular forgiveness stuff. I don't think that's the case. That's not my view about it. But I'm confused as well regarding these verses. And I think in order for a criminal to be, I mean, somebody, a criminal like a crime against God, committing a crime against God, forgiven, they have to go before God and confess, repent, properly understood. And I think that's what 1 John 1.9 is all about. People on the one hand say, I'm not a sinner, and then those who confess that they are sinners. And then that leads to the cleansing, and this is what happens when anybody becomes a Christian. I don't think that's teaching that we have to keep confessing the sins over and over and over again and every day doing that. I don't think that's what 1 John 1.9 is about. But nevertheless, clearly there is a confession element that is linked to forgiveness in that passage and other ones as well. We come before God and confess, acknowledge our sinfulness. And this is the entree to the grace of God applied to our sin, bringing us forgiveness and new life and eternal life. So now what do we do with the Erica Kirk who forgives her husband's murderer, presuming that the person that is being held now is the murderer. I'm just going to presume that for the sake of discussion. I could say alleged. But in any event, I think there are two aspects to forgiveness, and sometimes they're forensic in the sense that you are letting, you are a person turned and asked for forgiveness, acknowledges their crime, and then a person who has been harmed forgives them and does not hold it against them any longer. So there's a relational thing that's going on there. But what happens if the person who has sinned against you no longer is alive? Now what? Does one continue to carry the burden of that debt owed them by the person who sinned against them? And I think the answer is no. I think part of forgiveness, one aspect of it, is that we are letting something go that is due us. That's why they call that a debt. Forgive us our debts as we forgive others' debts. And some of the characterizations of forgiveness in the New Testament, specifically about Jesus, it's in terms of debt. They owe us something, and what we do is we let that go. We don't demand that they pay it back. We don't get our pound of flesh. That could be done in relationship with them if they turn and come to us, but it can be done even if they don't. And I think that that's what Charlie Kirk's wife did. Erica let it go. It was hard for her, but she was not going to carry, continue to carry the burden of this anger, hostility, you owe me mentality regarding Charlie Kirk's murderer. Now I think this is a different category than the other thing that Jesus was talking about. And part of the reason I say that is because there are circumstances where there is no repentance. And consequently, that is not resolved between them and God. I mean, that's a separate, you know, issue between them and God. The issue here is what about us? What do we do? And I think that there is a place, and I could construct something from the New Testament from other verses, forgive others just as God in Christ has forgiven you. So there it doesn't seem to have any qualification. What is that, Ephesians 2 or 3 or 4? There's no qualifications given there about the forgiveness. It just says forgive, and there does seem to be a significant element of emotional, mental health that is a result of that, that someone is a forgiving person. You know, Proverbs says that the, let's see, Proverbs 19, what, 4? Says a man's integrity makes him slow to anger and it is his glory to overlook a transgression. Overlook the transgression. Now, notice that there's nothing said there about the transgressor's repentance, but there is something said about the benefit of overlooking a transgression. In other words, you just let it go. And I think this is what Erica Kirk was doing. As a Christian, she is not going to carry this burden of anger and hurt against this person as a personal vendetta, but she's just going to, as best as she's able to, by the grace and mercy of God, let it go. I actually think that's healthy. We should be forgiving persons, even if the other person does not repent. Now, if they do, especially so, and that would have to be the case in their relationship with God, but where it comes to interpersonal relationships, I don't want to carry the burden of anger and hostility towards others who have done me wrong. It's too big of a burden. I want to let it go, and I think that's what is being asked of us in different passages like the Proverbs one, and I think that's characteristic of this different aspect of repentance. So two different issues going on here. I think it is a little confusing. I'm with you, Steve. I'm with you, Tom. That's the best I can do to work it out. If it's just up to me, not dependent on anybody else, pardon me, I should let it go. Let it go. All right, Greg Kokel here for Stand to Reason. Give them a heaven, friends. Bye-bye now.
