# What About Baptism for the Dead?

- Publication date: 2026-07-22
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/779a6b5b-108d-30ab-a150-a45f790758e2`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Hello, friends. Greg Kokel here. Stand to Reason is the show. And I'm here to answer your questions, take your comments, field your complaints about anything in the broad area of ethics, values, and religion. My number is 562-424-8714, 562-424-8714. That's the number to call in if you're listening live or you're not listening live, but you're ready to call in during the live show, which is Tuesdays from 4 until 6. That's when we record. 562-524-8714. I'm just as I'm waiting, oh, there it is. I found it. I was waiting for the music to come up and I'm reading rapidly 1 Corinthians 15 to find a verse, and I found it because something really cool happened today. My sweet daughter, who's 18 years old and loves the Lord, sent me a text, and the text said, What do you know about baptism of the dead in the Mormon Church? What do you know about baptism of the dead in the Mormon Church? Now, I have a number of short things to say about this that are important. The first one is, it was really cool for me to get a text from my daughter asking me that question. That's really cool. She's asking her dad about this question she has about the Mormon Church here, the LDS church. Now, I don't know how, what's prompted that because right now she's with her older brother in Alaska. But I'm glad she's asking me. And we went to church on Sunday, went to breakfast afterwards, and we talked about the sermon, and I like discipling my daughter. For many of you, it's really ordinary. It's because you homeschool your kids, you have an environment that, this is really natural. But that isn't the way our situation is kind of developed, unfolded, whatever. And not that spiritual things aren't things we talk about, we do. But it's just, this is really neat that she's in a stage in her life where we're able to talk about these things kind of as grown-ups and discuss the details, all right? So, that's the first very cool thing for me. And I have told her in the past, and, you know, I've talked to so many parents who said to me, who have said to me, we have raised our girl, our boy, our daughter, our son, our children in the Lord all the time. And then, now they're not walking with the Lord. They go away to college and they leave the Lord or whatever. And it burdens my heart. And I know you can't control people. People believe what they believe. You can't guarantee anything like that. Now, my understanding, by the way, just from the statistical analysis, and this is, I'm trying to remember his name, Christian something or other, who does research on this. He said, he did an examination over at Notre Dame. He said that one of the things he discovered in his research is that the most consistent indicator that children of Christians will stay Christians when they're older is whether their parents lived a consistent Christian life. He said it's almost like determinative, 85%. So, it's just a thing to keep in mind, that your kids are watching you. Everything. Listening to what you say. Everything you say. And so, consistency in your behavior and thinking and talking with your professed Christianity is really critical, all right? Seems obvious, but sometimes we don't think of it that way. But anyway, so she's asking me now, and this is a good thing. Okay, we get to talk. Okay. Now, what about her question? What do you know about baptism of the dead in the Mormon Church? Okay, so there's two things going on here. What do I know about baptism of the dead and the second part of, is it really as it's practiced in the Mormon Church? And I, of course, the show's coming up and I wasn't able to give a full-throated response, so I gave her a short one. I'll tell you what I said because there's a lot of good stuff just in this short response. And the first thing I said was, it's based on a single reference Paul makes to it in 1 Corinthians 15. Nothing else. That's what I texted back. Nothing else. I know of no other place in the Bible where anything is mentioned about baptism for the dead. And you find it in 1 Corinthians 15, and as my music was coming up, I was frantically searching, and then I found it, verse 29. Now, keep in mind, 1 Corinthians 15 is all about the resurrection. The resurrection of Jesus and the final resurrection to reward or judgment. And the broad claim is, there's a resurrection. Jesus was raised and will be raised. That's a good summary of 1 Corinthians 15. There is a resurrection. And if there is no resurrection, and we said there is one, then we're lying. And if your salvation is dependent on the resurrection of Jesus and there is no resurrection, then Jesus didn't rise from the dead, therefore you're still in your sins and we're all a bunch of idiots. That's my paraphrase, but that's basically what Paul is saying there in 1 Corinthians 15. So there's a whole bunch of stuff about resurrection in 1 Corinthians 15. So when you get to verse, what did I say, 29? He's making kind of a reference, a stray reference. And he's talking about the consequence of the final resurrection where death loses its sting and all things will be put under subjection to Christ. And when all things are subjected to Him, then the Son Himself will also be subjected to the one who subjected all things to Him so that God may be all in all, in all, rather. So there's an eschatological final ending and everybody lived happily ever after kind of note to this. But keep in mind, the whole thing he's talking about is there is a resurrection. Jesus rose from the dead and there will be a final resurrection. And in verse 29, he says this, otherwise, he's kind of going back to this discussion about is there really a resurrection? Otherwise, what will those do who are baptized for the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, then why are they baptized for them? Now, it's interesting. He doesn't say, why do we baptize for the dead? It says, why are they baptized for them? This is not something Christians are doing. Somebody else is doing whatever this is. People might say, well, what is that? And my answer is really easy. I don't know. And I have some ideas. I've heard some things. But the thing is, we don't know. Now, that's really important. And this is the second thing that I sent to my daughter, that it's always dangerous to build any kind of doctrine, any doctrinal practice, any church-wide enterprise that you're given to as a denomination, like the LDS are, on one verse. It's always dangerous to build any kind of doctrine on one verse. Especially if, one, the idea is odd and the concept of, at least the way some people seem to be reading this, where you baptize them for the dead.

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

The dead didn't get baptized. They're not saved because they didn't get baptized or whatever. So what we're going to do is, by proxy, we're going to baptize for that person. That's why the LDS is all into genealogies. We're going to baptize by proxy for them, and that will kind of spring them from wherever they're at up higher to wherever they go. I mean, it isn't simply heaven and hell in Mormonism. But nevertheless, it's kind of a rescue operation by proxy. Oh, what's the biblical support? Here it is, 1 Corinthians 15:29. Otherwise, what will those do who are baptized for the dead if the dead are not raised at all? Why then are they baptized for them? Oh, well, what the heck is that? And why are they doing it? It doesn't tell us, is the point. And so what you have to do is you have to take this vague reference that seems to intimate that it's another group of people that Paul is talking about, not Christians. You're going to have to invest it with all kinds of meaning that you can't justify from the bare verse itself. Do you see how dangerous that is? You got this one verse that makes this vague reference and, oh, OK, well, here's what he means, based on what? Do you say that? Well, it's probably this. So we're going to bank on that, and now we're going to build a whole ecclesiastical procedure around it. OK, you see that, the problem? I hope you see the problem. And it's not just a doctrine built on a single verse, but it just seems odd. Why do you say it's odd? Because it seems out of step with other clear biblical teaching. Remember, it says in Hebrews, it is appointed for a man once to die and then comes the judgment. Jesus says to the thief on the cross, okay, today you will be with me in paradise. Not the other guy, but you will. And that's today. So there's a quick turnaround there. It isn't like they're like waiting for someone to get wet on their behalf so they can be sprung out of perdition and into wherever, nice place, heaven of some sort. I'm thinking from the perspective of Mormon theology. So, by the way, I don't at all mean to be minimizing, disrespecting, or dissing in any sense Mormonism. That's not my point at all. What I'm saying is this, when anybody bases their ideas, theological ideas, on a single reference that's vague, you're in hot water. And I think, it turns out, that this doctrine teaching of the Mormon church is problematic because it seems to indicate, the scripture seems to teach, you get one shot. Once you're dead, you're either with Jesus in paradise or not. You're in Hades, you're in the burning dump, whatever, where the fire doesn't go out and where the, you know, the worm doesn't die. It's one or the other. And this is an ultimate sense. I'm not even weighing in on the nature of the intermediate state. Well, how long does it take to get there and is it like snap instantaneous? I don't know. But the point is, you got a choice to make before you die. And once you die, that's it. And this is why there is all throughout the gospels this sense of urgency to make sure that we take care of this now. And it doesn't seem to say, well, do your best now and if you mess up, don't worry, we'll baptize someone for you later. And that will take care of things. So it's an odd teaching, given the rest of the biblical record that seems to indicate otherwise. By the way, notice that I haven't told you what baptism for the dead is yet. What I have told you is I don't know. But that doesn't mean just because we don't know what it is, we can't respond to this issue because this is just one vague verse. So that the lesson is, any doctrine that is based on one vague verse is probably wrong because any doctrine that's important is not going to be just communicated to the Corinthians in writing in this vague way. No, you're going to find the important things repeated multiple times. Why? Because they're the important things. Duh. And these solitary references may raise questions, what the heck is he talking about? I am going to just make a comment in that direction in just a moment. But I want you to get this bigger picture, the more important issue, frankly. You don't build a doctrine on one verse. That seems odd with other passages that are clear, not vague. And this one is unclear, the single passage where it shows up. OK. Now, there's the other thing that I want to mention, and that is that this doctrine trades on the idea that there is no salvation without water baptism. That's false. We've talked about it before, and there are people who have denominations where they believe in baptismal regeneration. I have plenty of respect for them, no disrespect, certainly. I just think they're wrong. And of the passages that we see that seem to indicate water baptism is necessary for salvation, on a closer look at those passages and the rest of them that speak of baptism, it seems really clear that it's not the case that water baptism is part of the salvation package. It is a result or a proper response to salvation. We cannot withhold, now we see they have the Holy Spirit, have received the Holy Spirit just as we have, Peter says in Acts chapter 10 regarding Cornelius. After he speaks the gospel to them and without any altar call or invitation, bang, they start manifesting evidence of the Holy Spirit now within them and their regeneration. Well, look at, they've already received the Holy Spirit having believed received. Ephesians chapter 1, the Holy Spirit of promise. They've already received it just as we have. Now we can't withhold the water for baptism from them. See how the baptism follows the believing and receiving and regeneration. I'm not going to say a lot about that, but I'm just saying that's a problem also with this view. Because this implies it is salvation that saves or at least is central or vital, I'm sorry, it is baptism that saves or is central or vital to it. And so, okay, well, they died without any of this, so let's get them baptized by proxy, baptism for the dead. Now we got them going at least. No, baptism is unrelated to salvation in that way. It is related to being saved, not to getting saved. All right, no. Having said all of that, what the heck is going on in 1 Corinthians 15, 29? Well, I don't really know for sure, but I remember something that I was told about it. I haven't done a deep dive in the verse. It's not a concern to me, really. Why not? Because it's one verse in the whole Bible that makes reference to this. Then it can't be that important. That's kind of my view. Plus, there's a hint in the passage, and I emphasized it a couple of times when I read it, but let me go back to it. Otherwise, what will those do who are baptized for the dead? Now, that's a little vague so far. If the dead are not raised at all, why then are they baptized for them? Now, it's more clear. It's third person. He's not talking about something that's going on inside, like first person plural, us. It's third person plural, they, them. It's a different group. This is probably a practice that's done by pagans. It's not a biblical practice. And now this would make a lot of sense. Remember, Paul is arguing here in 1 Corinthians 15, the resurrection is real. Jesus was raised. There'll be a final resurrection. And people who are saying there is no resurrection, really? Look at all this. And by the way, even the...

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

They didn't get it. Even the pagans understand that there's going to be a resurrection, which is why they, them, baptize their dead, expecting it will have a ramification in the future when there's a resurrection. That's the best explanation I can come up with. I don't have to even go to a commentary. I don't have to go in a commentary to know that one verse isn't adequate to make a doctrine. I don't have to go to a commentary to read the pronouns in here and realize probably what Paul is referring to. It's right there in the words. Now, I could go do a deeper dive on this if I want, but what I do know too is that there's nothing in this passage that justifies what the LDS church is doing on behalf of a bunch of dead people. There's no benefit there. Now, maybe there's, in their mind, there's further justification in things that are written by Joseph Smith. That could be the case, but I don't know about that because that's a, I don't do a deep dive in Mormonism. Amy would have more understanding of that than I would, all right? And this isn't her show. That show is a different show called hashtag STR ask, and maybe somebody can send in a note to that and Amy then will be able to weigh in, all right? But I'm so thrilled that my daughter asked me a question like this, and I was able to give her a substantive answer. I don't know for sure, but you can't base anything important on a single reference that's vague and seems to be inconsistent with other passages. That's the thing I want her to keep. And it's the same thing I want you to keep too. All right, let's take a break and we'll come back to your calls here on Stand to Reason in just a moment. Have you ever wondered how Stand to Reason is able to produce fresh, accessible content each week? We rely on generous donors so that we can provide you with the tools and tactics you need to be an effective ambassador for Christ. If you've benefited from this podcast or any of our donor-provided resources, including our apps, blog posts, articles, and short videos, consider making a financial contribution to Stand to Reason today. Just visit str.org slash donate to show your financial support. It has been an honor providing you with a host of free resources for more than 27 years to help you give voice to the Christian worldview. Help us continue by making a financial gift today at str.org slash donate. Would you like a Stand to Reason speaker at your event? Greg, Alan, Tim, John, Megan, and I, Tripp, are available in person or online. Just email booking at str.org. Our team speaks on a wide range of topics from issues in bioethics, gender, and science to topics in apologetics, theology, and philosophy, and how to respond to other worldviews, all from a biblical perspective. Whether it's a conference, youth event, or Sunday service, we're here to give confidence for every Christian, clear thinking for every challenge, courage and grace for every encounter. All righty, friends, time to go to calls here. You want me to go to Canada first? Is that why that's flashing? Okay, this is Xander in Canada. Xander, welcome to the show. Yeah, hello. This is my first time calling. Say again. This is the first time I've called. Oh, it's the first time you called. Well, glad to have you. Are you on speakerphone? I have my earbuds plugged in. You have what? I'm using my earbuds right now. I still can't understand you. That's the problem. Can you just talk directly onto a phone, or are you... Okay, I'm here. I'll speak closer to my phone. I just have a really hard time understanding you. Hello? Okay, that's much better, Xander. Thanks so much. Okay, what's up? Yeah, hold on. Okay, so I know you've already answered a lot of, like, questions about the inclusiveness, but this is kind of something that I wanted to know a little bit more about, so if you don't mind. Hold on, you just went back into that mode where it's really hard to understand. Are you still talking directly into the phone? Yeah, yeah, yeah, I am. Huh, okay, well, I'll do my best to understand. I have your question written down here so I can respond to it, even if I don't understand. But you are interested in how do I reconcile the concept of exclusivism, like only those who believe in Jesus are saved, with 1 Timothy 2.4, right, where it says God desires all men to be saved. Okay. If exclusivism is true, then a lot of, like, millions of people will be, like, will have no opportunity to be saved simply because, like, they were born at the wrong place at the wrong time. Yeah, well, okay, well, that isn't the reason they're not saved, that they were in the wrong place at the wrong time. Maybe we can revisit that in a moment. But here's the difficulty of citing 1 Timothy 2.4 regarding the issue of exclusivism. The reason that I believe in the exclusive view or the exclusivist view that one must believe in Jesus to be saved is because that view is repeated over and over and over again in very clear terms all through the gospel. There is no ambiguity regarding that from Matthew 1.1 all the way to the Revelations 20-whatever or 22-whatever. So what there is is a massive, your question is a fair one, but we just have to, we have to weigh the statement in 1 Timothy 2.4, which says, as I recall, something to the effect of God desires all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, for there is one mediator between man and God, the man Christ Jesus. That's the verse, right? Yeah, and the thing is, like, I'm, look, I've been looking into Catholicism lately, and this is, like, one of the doctrines that I've had some difficulty, like, trying to support some scripture. So, yeah, I understand, like, where you're coming from. Okay, so you, you understand that the inclusivist doctrine is not consistent, the Roman Catholic, is not consistent with scripture, but this does raise a legitimate question, okay? And I, I want you to think about it because I have something for you to chew on, but I just didn't want anybody to miss the procedural kind of element here, and that is, we've got to interpret, let's just call it the unclear in light of the clear. So, if, if, if it is true that the doctrine of exclusivism is God's biblical doctrine when it comes to salvation, then, then how do we incorporate this other verse into that? That's the way we want to go. It isn't like, well, I can't explain 1 Timothy 2.4, so therefore inclusivism is false. Inclusivism, I'm sorry, exclusivism, my, my bad. Therefore, exclusivism is false. No, it's, it's true because of everything that, that is said. But what about this passage? That's the question. So, there's a verse in 1 Thessalonians chapter 4, and, uh, you might be familiar with it, and it goes something like this. Um, For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that is, that you all abstain from sexual immorality. So, now we know that it is God's will that we abstain from sexual immorality. Clear enough, right? Okay, but, but God allows all kinds of people to do things they shouldn't be doing sexually, even though it's his will that they don't do it. And what this shows us is there's some things that it's God's will regarding that he doesn't, um, that he's leaving up to us to do. In other words, we can violate his will. So, there's, in a sense, there is two ways that the concept of the will of God is used in scripture. Sometimes when it says, this is God's will, and no one can thwart it. Okay, no one can, you know, put off the hand of God if he's decided, decided to do something. David talks about this, and of course there are lots of places in scripture that make it clear that in one way of understanding the will of God, God's going to do it, no one can stop him. Okay, is that fair so far? And in another way of the scripture using the term God's will, God isn't committed, he says, this is what I want, but I'm not committing myself to do it. That's on you to do. So, there are two different ways of understanding the will of God. Fair enough? Okay, so now when we come to 1 Timothy 2, when it says God desires, or we could say God wills all to be saved, well, that doesn't mean that he's going to save all. He could want everybody to turn to him, even though they don't. Does that make sense? Yeah, but like, again, like, why doesn't he...

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

I heard that, why doesn't he like, and he hits the rest. Say it again. Okay, it's just hard, partly you're talking really fast for the connection you have. Yeah, and I apologize. Just slow down a little bit, because I'm not sure what your question is at this point. Okay, but like, again, like, why doesn't he, like, God give people like that opportunity to be saved? Well, you're presuming that he doesn't give them an opportunity, and what Paul says in Romans chapter 1 is, at one level, everybody has an opportunity to turn to him at one level of revelation. But instead of responding to the modest revelation about God that is adequate for them to know about the true God, they instead turn from that, they suppressed that truth because they had unrighteous motives. Jesus said the light has come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil. Now, that's John 3, and Paul's reflecting the same thing in Romans 1. So you're presuming something about people that the Bible says is not the case. You're presuming that they don't have the opportunity or enough knowledge, at least, to know some of the basics about God. Wait, hold on. So when you say that if someone did respond to, like, general revelation, then they could be saved? Well, it's interesting what Paul says in Romans 1. He doesn't say that general revelation is adequate to save people. What he says is general revelation is adequate to condemn them. They are without excuse, okay? Now, if a person is responding in their heart to the general revelation in an appropriate way, let's put it that way, they want to know the true God. I actually think God is going to honor that, and part of the reason I say that is my conviction is that their move towards the true God is something that God is already working in their heart to accomplish. They're not just doing this on their own, because if they were all on their own, they wouldn't pursue God. They need God's help in some sense, and how much help they get from God is going to be different depending on who you talk to theologically, right? But everybody needs help, because the weight of sin and the distortion sin causes on our minds is so powerful that just that alone would never be adequate, would never allow anybody, would not be adequate for anybody to turn to God and worship him, because they love sin, just like Jesus said in John chapter 3. So people do have adequate revelation to be condemned for their rejection of it. Your question is, well, what if they don't reject it? Well, if they don't reject it and they're moving towards the true God, then God's going to help them along the way. That's my conviction, but they all end up at the same place after 0-0 A.D., you know, whatever. After the zero year, you know, after the Pentecost, let's call it that for the time being. After the, in the new era, the New Testament era, the new covenant era, it's always Jesus. There's no substitute for that. And this is why we're to go hither, thither, and yon, and the Christian did that with the only message that could save fallen human beings. So all of that is completely consistent with Scripture, Xander, rather. Do I still have time? What was that? Do I still have time? Like, how much time do I have? Oh, yeah, you can, sure. You have some more time. Just speak slowly, please. Um, I'm just a little bit nervous because I don't really talk on the phone that much. You, you still have where? I'm just a little bit nervous because I don't speak on the phone that much. Oh, yeah, well, I'm sorry. You're doing fine, but just talk more slowly, but I understand that you can be nervous. That's okay. It's just pace. Xander, it's just you and me having a conversation. No worries, all right? Okay, nobody's listening. Yeah, sure. Go to the Romans 1 passage, Romans 1, 18-20, right? Yes, that's one of them that I made reference to, correct. Okay, I actually wanted to ask a little bit about that. So, can you, so your interpretation of that would be that every, like, unbeliever is suppressing knowledge of God, right? Well, you know, let me just read it, okay? And then, and you're familiar, obviously, with it. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteous men who suppress the truth in unrighteousness because that which is known about God is evident within them, for God made it evident to them. For since the creation of the world, his invisible attributes, his eternal power and divine nature have been clearly seen, being understood through what has been made, so that they are without excuse. Even though they knew God, they did not honor him as God or give him thanks, but they became futile in their speculations and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing to be wise, they became fools, exchanged the glory of God for the image in the form of corruptible man and birds, etc., etc. Now, my question is, I mean, I could keep reading, but you know the passage. You asked me, well, is that your interpretation? I've just read the passage. How else is anybody going to take that? Right, and I would say that, I would agree that that is, that's like the most straightforward interpretation of the passage. But I guess my question would be, later on, like, if you read to like verse 29, it talks about how they have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, greed, and depravity, and that they're full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and malice. So, I would ask, like, who do you think Paul was talking about when he wrote that they have become filled with every kind of, like, wickedness? Well, I think what Paul is doing here, you can look at other numbers or other passages where there's kind of incidental application of some of these notions. What Paul is doing is he is not just kind of spouting off about heathen people. He is making a case regarding salvation. That's what his book is about, or at least the first half of it. He's developing an argument. And as he's talking about they are without excuse here, then he talks, I think, in chapter 2, there's a they are without excuse too, or he certainly implies that if he doesn't use those same words. And then, in chapter 3, he says that, are we better than they, we Jews? Verse 9, not at all, for we already have already charged that both Jews and Greeks are all under sin. Then he goes and he quotes in the Old Testament and that every mouth then, his conclusion, every mouth may be closed and all the world may become accountable to God. That's chapter 3, verse 19. The point I'm making here is that I don't think that Paul is talking about certain people but not others. He said this is humanity, and humanity is lost. How can they be saved? For all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God, but the free gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. So that's from chapter 3 and chapter 6. I'm kind of jumping around in Romans, but you know the kind of Romans road. The reason that Paul wrote Romans was to give a very clear explanation and characterization of the grace of God given the fallenness of man. And that's why I think it's fair to use Romans, starting in Romans 1, as I've done, because all I'm doing in my use of Romans 1, 18, and following is the same thing it appears that Paul himself is doing. All human beings are condemned. There is no justification by any other means that they can find at all. All are under sin. Now that's the bad news, and that's what he means to communicate. Okay, but if you would apply a... Are you frustrated? No, I'm just... I take a little bit of time to think, so... Okay, so what next from here, based on what I said? What else can I help you with? It sounds like you don't entirely agree with me. Is that a fair thing to say? I could be mistaken. I guess a little bit. What do you think Paul is doing in Romans as a book? I mean, actually, I would agree with you when you say that, like, he was using it to build a case that everyone is, like, under sin and they're guilty. I would agree with that. Okay, so that's kind of his point. And then he gives... That's a...

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

Now he gives the good news, and that's Jesus. But we can't say, here's the bad news, but it doesn't apply to a whole bunch of people who never heard, because Paul doesn't allow that loophole. He's talking about everybody who, in fact, can I, let me just flip forward then. It might take us a second. There's a place where it talks about the gospel going out and who's going to call on the Lord if they haven't heard. Oh, here it is in Romans 10. It's interesting. In light of part of the case I'm making is natural revelation, which is a concept you understand. Obviously, you used the phrase, is a way that God has communicated to everybody about himself so clearly enough that he could hold them accountable. Okay, that's my point that I'm making. Makes sense so far? Okay, so here's what he says in Romans 10. How will they call on him? Whoever calls on the name of the Lord will be saved. But wait a minute, how will they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how will they believe in him whom they have not heard? That's kind of your point, right? And how will they hear without a preacher? And how will they preach unless they are sent? And just as, how beautiful on the feet are the feet of those who bring good news of good tidings. Well, so far, this is kind of your point, and I'm sympathetic so far. They didn't all heed the word. Oh, wait, I'm jumping. Okay, so now we're here in verse 16. They didn't all heed the word. Who has believed our report? So faith comes from hearing and hearing by the word of God. But I say, surely, verse 18, they have not heard, have they? And he says, indeed, they have. And then he cites Psalm 19, which is one of those passages that talks about natural revelation. He says, their voice has gone out into all the earth and their words to the ends of the world. All right. So in other words, he's saying natural revelation is a voice. It does have words. It communicates content and they will be held responsible for that. No one could say, I haven't heard. No, they didn't hear about Jesus. They didn't get to the son. They've already rejected the father before they got to the son. With me? So I think in chapter 10, following the same argument Paul is developing here, he takes sidetracks with a couple of chapters and different things. But now we're back to a similar argument being raised right at the beginning and your legitimate concern. What about those who never heard? And Paul says they have all heard. Therefore, there is no excuse. I don't see how else you can read that, interpret that, if you will, Xander, without coming to that conclusion. It's not that hard. Yeah, I would agree with that. One of my... Are we good then? Yeah. Well, actually, just one more thing. So when it comes to Romans 1, 18 to 20... Yes. ...21, I mean, I guess I would ask... Hold on one second. Yes, you would ask. Yeah, okay, okay. So if you would apply, like, Romans 1, 18 to 21 to, like, every atheist, wouldn't you also have to apply it, Romans... What do you think Paul has in mind when he makes those statements? The 18 to 21? Yeah, all of that. Yeah. You're asking, would I apply that to every atheist? And does Paul seem to be speaking all-inclusively there or just to a smaller group of people, but it doesn't count atheists? I mean, one thing I've heard from some people is that at that point in time, atheists, in the way that we would speak of them, didn't really exist. So they're not the people that Paul had in mind. What was the last you said? Well, at that point in time, like, atheists, as we, like, think of them, didn't exist, so they're not the people that Paul had in mind. That's one thing I've heard. That there were no... Okay, well, see, this is kind of specializing reading into the text. Paul is talking about the nature of humanity. That's what he's talking about. Now, atheists are human. They fall under humanity. Paul says they suppress the truth of God. I think the evidence for God is obvious. And this is why even atheists talk about mother nature, because they look at the natural realm and they anthropomorphize it. They have to use a human-type being to talk about the miracle of mother nature. Isn't mother nature brilliant? Look at the power. Don't ever, don't fool mother nature, blah, blah, blah. Why do they do that? And I think that belies this interior notion that the appearance of design of the world is actually evidence for the design of the world, and even atheists know that. Well, I mean, when it comes to, like, mother nature and stuff, I think doing that just helps people be more, like, sympathetic to taking care of the environment. Well, I don't think that's why this phrase is being used, so people are sympathetic to the environment. I don't... Look, if there is no God, why should anybody care about the environment per se, if what... Except for whatever we're doing to the environment helps us. But people have kind of deified the environment to some degree, and it says we have to protect mother nature, protect mother earth from human beings. So human beings can't do... It just... I'm just making a simple statement, and the simple statement is design is obvious. Even Richard Dawkins says this in his book, The Blind Watchmaker. The biological realm is a complex world that gives the appearance, he says, acknowledges, of having been designed for a purpose. Now, he said, not really, because it's, you know, natural selection working on mutations and Darwinian evolution. But all... What I'm saying is, it just... Even people who are atheists in different ways acknowledge that the universe seems like it's designed by a person. And so there, what they're doing is affirming what Paul says in Romans chapter 1. It looks like that. No, well, maybe it is designed. No, no, no. And they, what? Suppress the truth. Paul's just saying, you're responsible for that. You know better. That's what he's saying. They're atheists aren't accepted. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. This is from the Old Testament. And part of that is in reference to the natural order. If you follow the Psalm, I think it's... Maybe that's how Psalm 19 starts. I think that is Psalm 19, which is the same Psalm Paul is quoting here in Romans 10. All right? Yeah. Well, in verse 20... Actually, how much time do I have? Do I have... Well, you know, I got another caller on board. I'm going to need to get to him. Xander, let's just do this. We've covered a lot of bases here, and I'm really glad you called and I've given a lot of time to you. Let's say goodbye for now, and you can call back another time and we'll chat about more of the things on your mind. Is that fair? Yeah. Oh, yeah, sure. Okay, appreciate it. Thanks, Xander. All righty, bye-bye. Now let's... So we're going to talk with Gail in Encinitas. There we go. We got it. Gail, welcome to the show. Yes, thank you so much. You're welcome, Gail. And you're coming through nice, loudly and clearly. It's nice there. No static from across the border. Yeah. I apologize since the beginning of your ministry and donate to you. I want to tell everyone how wonderful the story of Why God Died that you wrote. Like, I use it as a witnessing tool and give it to people. And the story of Why God Died, everyone listening, buy it from Greg Koukl. Oh, well, thank you so much. And that, just so people know, that is a portion of the story of reality, and it's the portion that has to do with Jesus and the cross and the resurrection. So we have that in a smaller volume, isolated, excerpted, so to speak, from the story of reality. So thanks, Gail. I'm glad to hear that. You're on the move. Good for you. I also give the story of reality. They have to read that first. Anyway, my question is... Yes, wonderful. The Bible speaks, I believe, that time has a beginning. Yeah. And is time only on earth, or is it in heaven only? Because I thought there'd be no time in heaven. And if there is no time in heaven, when Christians die, like when I die, am I entering one by one as in time? Or when I die, will everyone be there already, even those who have not been born yet, who God knows will become Christians? So this is a really good question, but it reflects a confusion a lot of Christians have. And I'm fully sympathetic to the confusion because of the way we talk. Now, I have... I have... Da-da-da-da, drumroll, please. A master's degree in philosophy that allows me to talk about this in a way that I wouldn't have been able to talk about it before. But I'm going to...

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

to give you the philosophy of time in one easy step. All right? Think of it this way. I didn't make up this line, but I think it's great. Time is what keeps everything from happening at once. Great. So you and I are having a conversation. You called, past tense. We are talking now about some things, present tense. And shortly, you will not be on the phone anymore. If there was no time passing, then all of those things would be happening coterminously. I want to say at the same time, but it doesn't even make sense to say it's at the same time because there is no time passing. That happens at once. It is time that separates all of those events. Does that make sense so far? Yes, it does. Okay, so when we go to heaven, are things going to be happening with us and God and others in heaven that are separated from one another? Or are they everything happening all at once? What do you think? I would say separated. Yes, of course. Of course. Of course. You can't bow down if there's no time because it requires you to be erect and then you're down, and then you're raising your hands. Yeah, look at those are all temporal terms. Of course there's going to be time in heaven. And if there's no time in heaven, then nothing happens. That's true. May I ask if I, when I die, because Apostle Paul says, I think when you die, you're present with the Lord, absent from the body, you're present with the Lord. Correct. Do you believe that? Oh, of course. As a Christian, I'll be right in his presence. Yes, there's a lot of ambiguity about all that's entailed. So maybe like to be, I agree with the statement taken as a whole. I'm not sure. Okay, does this mean that when I close my eyes and breathe my last breath and there's the last beat of my heart and that's the last jolt of EKG, then right there in front of me is Jesus. Or do I have to kind of walk across the street to be there with Jesus and everybody else? I don't know. I mean, is there a little interim or, you know, a few moments? I don't know. But the point that Paul is making is that we're here or there. We're away from him and we trust in him and we believe in him. We don't see him, though, but one day we'll see him and then our hope will be fulfilled because to be absent from the body is to be present with the Lord. So I agree with that statement. I think he's right. I don't know how tightly that the time is wound there. And we'll see. But we will be there and say, hey, hi, Jesus. I'm here. I'm home. Whatever, you know. Yes. Thank you for shedding your blood to save me. However, sure, worship, whatever that, I mean, but things are happening. Things are happening, okay? And that's why I think God is temporal. Now, and by the way, the Bible does not require that God be outside of time. This is very important. The Bible doesn't weigh in on that directly. I actually think there's a verse that makes it clear that God is temporal. And I'll tell you in just a second. But what the Bible requires is that God is eternal. He had no beginning. He will have no end. What about us? We have a beginning, but we will have no end. But we are not eternal. We are everlasting. That's different. God had no beginning. He has no end, so he's eternal. There are no boundaries. For us, there is a boundary, our birthdays or nine months before our birthdays, you know, however you want to talk about it. And, but we will never, we will never live for an eternity, but we will live forever and ever. Okay. We won't, we will always have an age. I mean, I know it sounds creepy, especially for a woman, but you, you will always have an age no matter how long you live. Okay. So we, we will live forever and ever. So, but, but that, but that is what I did is condense four painful months. No, actually it was during the interterm. So it was the month of January, a bunch of intensive classes with Professor William Lane Craig on the issue of time that was really hard for me, but there it is. We're translators at stand to reason. So I can take all of that gobbledygook and I can just offer it to you here. And, and really whether or not time had a beginning, whether God was temporal before the creation or not is debatable. William Lane Craig thinks that that time started when God created. That was the first event of time before that God was atemporal. But after that, God's involved. And if God's involvement is separated and it all isn't happening at once, then even for God, time is passing. So God. Wonderful. So by the way, what that means then, I mean, because a lot of Christians talk, well, God's outside of time. Well, that's not my view. And if God's outside of time, then nothing happens for God. He doesn't do anything. Oh my goodness. You're right. So I, may I ask if I, when I die, because the Apostle Paul says that, I think when you, it's when you die, you're present with the Lord, absent from the body, you're present with the Lord. Correct. Do you believe that? Like, I will go as a Christian. I'll be right in his presence. Yes. There's a lot of ambiguity about all that's entailed. So maybe like to be, I agree with the statement taken as a whole. I'm not sure. Okay, does this mean that when I close my eyes and breathe my last breath and there's the last beat of my heart and that's the last jolt of EKG, then I, right there in front of me is Jesus. Or do I have to kind of walk across the street to be there with Jesus and everybody else? I don't know. I mean, there, there, is there a little interim or, you know, a few moments? I don't know. But the point that Paul is making is that we're here or there. We're away from him and we trust in him and we believe in him. We don't see him, though, but one day we'll see him and then our hope will be fulfilled because to be absent from the body is to be present with the Lord. So I, I agree with that statement. I think he's right. I don't know how tightly that the time is wound there and we'll see. But, but we will be there and say, hey, uh, hi, Jesus. I'm here. I'm home. Uh, whatever. You know, and then Thank you for shedding your blood to save me. However, sure, worship, whatever that, I mean, but things are happening. Things are happening. Okay. And that's, that's why I think God is temporal. Now, um, and by the way, the Bible does not require that God be outside of time. This is very important. The Bible doesn't weigh in on that directly. I actually think there's a verse that makes it clear that God is temporal. And I'll tell you in just a second. But what the Bible requires is that God is eternal. He had no beginning. He will have no end. What about us? We have a beginning, but we will have no end. But we are not eternal. We are everlasting. That's different. God had no beginning. He has no end, so he's eternal. There are no boundaries for us. There is a boundary. Our birthdays or nine months before our birthdays, you know, however you want to talk about it. And, but we will never, we will never live for an eternity, but we will live forever and ever. Okay. We, we won't, we will always have an age. I mean, I know it sounds creepy, especially for a woman, but you, you will always have an age no matter how long you live. Okay. So, um, we, we will live forever and ever. So, um, but, but, but I wouldn't say that God is not temporal. I mean, sorry, I wouldn't say he's timeless or that he is outside of time because if he's, if there were no temporal moments to God, then he's not doing anything. I think that's really what it comes down to. Now I'll tell you the verse that I think makes the point. I've got 40 seconds here, which Jesus makes an argument for the resurrection with his disciples where he says, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. So for God to say, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Jesus is pointing out, that means Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob still exist. They just haven't been raised yet. And that's an argument for the resurrection. But that only works if God is temporal because he's offering at what they call a temporal indexal, like now. Now is a temporal index. And so God is, Jesus is saying, for God right now, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob exist. Now there was some when he, they didn't exist right now for him, but at that point they did. And this is evidence Jesus argues for the resurrection. So anyway, there's a lot to think about there, Gail. It was wonderful talking to you and I stand the hour with your conversation with you. That's it for me, friends. Greg Kokel for Stand to Reason. Give them heaven, friends. Bye-bye now.
