# Where’s the Proof for God?

- Publication date: 2026-03-18
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/66e5aea1-414f-3e0a-9d72-c23bf655231c`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Well, hello, friends. Greg Kokel here, and this is Stand to Reason, of course. And lines are open at 855-243-9975. That's the number you can call when I'm live on Tuesdays from 4 to 6 p.m. Los Angeles time, and we are now on Daylight Savings Time, thankfully. We should stay there all year long, in my humble opinion. 1-855-243-9975. If you're outside the U.S., you can dial up 562-424-82229. Love to have you on board, talk with you about anything that's on your mind in the area of ethics, values, and religion. It's 35 years and running, doing the same thing, pretty much. And I keep, every once in a while, I hit, well, not once in a while, I get hit with new questions I've never heard before. I just had one. What was, who sits on the left side of God? That's coming up in a future show. My answer. A 13-year-old asked that. I never thought about that. But a fair question. Anyway, you can call up now or call in for open mic calls. Just go to our homepage and podcasts and live broadcasts, and you can leave your open mic call there. That's great for days when I don't have callers on for one reason or another. Maybe they're just slow to queue up when I'm live, and other days when I'm off schedule and I need to put a show together, so I don't leave you as an orphan when I'm out of town. Summertime, I spend quite a bit of time on Tuesdays gone. And so we put things in the can and keep them for then, so you get a regular diet of good stuff, not just from me, but also from Amy Hall, #STRask. And if you're listening to this show and you don't listen to that show, you're missing out, and you're missing out on Amy, who makes a great contribution. She's our Ask the Apologist at Realities, and her whole job is to stand at a table, do you sometimes sit? Sometimes maybe she's sit, and answer the questions of the multitudes of young people at Reality who come up to see her and talk to her and say, help me with this. It's interesting how the questions shift from year to year. For a long time, there were all kinds of questions about gender and all of the sexual issues. So, you know, LGBTQ and the rest of the letters, what's up with that? You know, trying to figure this out. And now they're more theological, having to do with the nature of grace and salvation. Lots and lots of those. And it's interesting, the shift. I'm not sure why. Maybe the other issues aren't as pressing as they used to be. Maybe they've just moved on. Whatever. So, but she's the one who helps me out with #STRask, or maybe I help her out, depends how you look at it. It's her show. I'm her guest. She's the host, and she's in charge. So please take a look at that. Subscribe so you can get that. Basically, we have four shows a week. Two one-hour shows. That's the ones I do by myself and two half-hour shows, roughly half-hour, 25 minutes. And that's #STRask. So just a reminder, though, we could use a lot more open mic calls. If you can't get in the queue, you don't have the time, you can't thread the needle in terms of the schedule to wait for me on Tuesdays when I'm live, just go to str.org and under podcasts and live broadcasts, go ahead and leave your question for your open mic calls. I want to talk a little bit about proof because I think this is a topic that comes up a lot with skeptics. Where's the proof? Or they also say there is no evidence for God, which I think is such a strange thing to say. You know, there's a difference between having no evidence and having evidence that one doesn't consider compelling. Okay? It's still evidence. It may not be compelling. It may not be decisive. It may not even be evidence that turns out to be for a thing that's true. There could be evidence that a number of people might have committed a crime, but only one person committed the crime. So you follow the evidence. But that's different from picking someone out of the mob and saying, you committed the crime, when there is no evidence that they were at all involved. So, but I hear that. You know, there's no evidence. There's no evidence. There's no evidence. You know, I used to have the Copleston's, what, 10, 12 volume series of the history of philosophy, and it starts in the ancients like four centuries BC. That would be, you know, Socrates and Plato and Aristotle. And then it moves through past the time of Jesus into the common era, if you will. But by the time you get to about the third or fourth century, all the way to about the 18th century, 1700s, virtually every person in the history of philosophy is a Bible-believing Christian. Do you think all of these really incredible thinkers, like Thomas Aquinas, for example, no slouch, they believe something without any reason at all, no evidence at all? I mean, that's pretty crazy to say that. Anyway, I want to talk about the issue of proof because this is something that comes up, well, you believe in God, but there's no proof. Or that may be interesting, the evidence that you're giving, but it's not proof. Now, I think that atheists are infatuated with the word proof. They bring this up with some regularity. And they use their definition of proof against Christian theism in a way that they would never use that definition with anything else that their life depended on. We rely on knowledge of certain things to be the case to keep us alive every single day. And in most cases, we lack proof of those things, but it doesn't mean that what we believe is not knowledge and reliable. But it is the word that is invade against Christians to disqualify their views because whatever they believe, it doesn't rise high enough to a standard of proof that justifies it. So if you are challenged by somebody and they say, well, that's not proof, or maybe they would say, give me proof that whatever follows, God exists, that Jesus lived, that Christ rose from the dead, or whatever, you have to pause there and qualify some things or else you're never going to get off the ground. That word proof could mean lots of different things. And when somebody says proof to me, now you're really in trouble because you have two concepts, proof and to me. That is some standard of proof that is adequate to change that person's mind. Well, that brings in a psychological factor that you can't control. And plus, it's not even clear what they mean by the word proof anyway. What would be adequate as proof for any particular thing? And if you don't clear that up at the outset of your conversation with some form of the question, what do you mean by that? You're dead in the water because you're going to be offering evidences or rationale or reasons, maybe, if you have them, in response to the request for proof, and they may smile and nod and say, well, you got a point there, but it's not what? Proof. It doesn't rise to that level of proof, whatever that level is. So you're going to be dismissed, it seems to me, at every turn unless you deal with that issue. So the question that I would ask is, in the vein of what do you mean by that, our first Columbo question, I would ask, what do you mean by proof? What kind of proof? What is the standard of proof that you're looking for

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

to justify, say, the existence of God. And, by the way, if they give you that, some standard, ask them, is this the standard you use to justify anything you believe that is necessary to keep you alive? You see, I think there's a double standard here, and that's why that question's important. And what I've done, in some cases, I've just said, let's just get rid of that word proof because it's not helpful. It's too ambiguous because there's so many different senses in which a thing is proven. You can have what's called apodictic proof. Now, that's the most severe requirement because that means a proof that is not capable of being undermined. You cannot be mistaken about this. Well, what does that apply to? Math? That's about it. You know? 2 is the square root of 4. Prove it. Well, just think about what square root means and what 2 and 4 means, and can't you just see that that is a true statement? And if you string a bunch of those true mathematical statements together, you make, you can assemble proofs, geometric proofs or geometry-type proofs or whatever, physics proofs, whatever. Okay, you can do that, maybe apodictic. That's one kind of proof, but nobody lives by that. This isn't what we apply to our life, this measure, standard of proof. Okay, what else? How about beyond a reasonable doubt? Now, that is a fairly severe standard of proof and the most severe or demanding in a practical basis because that's the standard of proof that is required for criminal trials. You have to demonstrate that a person is guilty, not beyond a possible doubt. That's way too demanding because all kinds of things, doubts are always possible. The question is beyond a reasonable doubt. That's the way the judicial system works. And in that case, you are weighing a whole bunch of things and at some point, you're passing the mark, if you want to consider percentiles, maybe 75 or 80, maybe 85%. That is, gee, it just seems most reasonable, the odds-on favorite and weigh in the favorite, so to speak, a zone, is this particular proposition, so we're going to use that standard. And this is the standard in criminal trials and this is the standard by which we decide whether a person goes to jail or prison or gets executed beyond a reasonable doubt. Now, that's a pretty aggressive standard, but that's fair. Reasonable doubt is the issue. Here's another one. What about preponderance of evidence? That's also a legal definition, but it's in civil suits, not criminal trials. So this is a 51% to 49%. Whatever is the most supported by the evidence, even if it's not beyond a reasonable doubt, if the preponderance or the majority of the evidence in favor of it, that's a standard of proof as well. What about inference to the best explanation? This is another standard of proof, so to speak. Now, that's called abductive reasoning. And what we are looking for is maybe not a certain truth, but all things considered, all the evidence in play, what makes the most sense? What is the best explanation for the way things are? And by the way, that is the way science operates. It operates based on inferences gathered together in support of a particular explanation that is best explained by the inferences, by the evidences in play. Now, it may turn out as time goes on and scientific knowledge increases and analysis improves that there are more, there's more data you have to take in and you might adjust what you think the X, the best explanation is. But nevertheless, that's another standard and it is the one I think most useful for the kind of things we're doing because we're not doing math. We're not doing deductive reasoning as much. I mean, in some ways, we are. If we say, for example, that if there is no God, there's no objective morality, but there is objective morality, therefore, there is a God. Now, that's a, a form of deductive reasoning. It's called modus tollens. And if the two premises are true, then the, then since the form is valid, if the premises are true, then the conclusion is sound. The argument is sound and the conclusion is certain. So we can't argue that way, but we have to defend the premises. And it turns out that the premises are going to seem true or false by usually a preponderance of evidence and not some other form of apodictic proof or, well, maybe a beyond a reasonable doubt, I guess you could say, but this is how this works. And so in any line of reasoning, it's possible, almost any, it's possible for us to be mistaken. The question is, is it likely? And when I argue that all things that begin to exist had a cause, the universe began to exist, therefore it had a cause, of course, which would be outside of the universe. That's a type of, that's a type of deductive logic. And if the premises are true, then the conclusion is true. That's a form of the cosmological argument. It's called the kalam. So certainly we can offer proofs. But it's not, I mean, proofs after a fashion. But it's not my way to try to argue this proves God such that the conclusion is unescapable. I'd rather, because all someone has to do is think of a possible way that your conclusion doesn't follow, and now, now you're hung out to dry. And so I think it's better to argue based on, even with a thing like the moral argument or the cosmological arguments, I've just offered two versions of both of them, a version each of, of them. Even with that, I'm going to say, what is the most reasonable? What is the odds-on favorite? What is the thing that seems to make most sense given all of the evidence in front of us? And so I'm not going to try to rise to some standard, unreasonable, unrealistic standard of proof if some skeptic or atheist wants to ask me for proof. I'm going to ask him, what does that mean? What's the standard that you'll accept? And if they hem and haw about that, my, my desire is just get rid of the word proof. How about if I gave you some good reasons? And if it turns out you disagree with me, you're going to have to say why those reasons aren't good and why the alternative is better, more reasonable, all things considered. And either God exists or he doesn't, either A or non-A. So this is a law of excluded middle if you're thinking about the laws of logic that make this way of reasoning fairly simple. Either the universe, given that it began, either something caused it or no thing caused it. Again, either A or non-A. There is no middle in that construction. Makes it more simple. And I'm just asking the question, what is the most reasonable? Oh, proof words don't help us here. They just confuse matters. What is the most, we don't use those kind of words for anything else we think we know that our life depends on, so why are we going to use it here? Let's just use our standard means of knowing things, which characteristically is beyond a reasonable doubt, maybe preponderance of evidence, maybe inference to the best explanation, whatever. Let's put those into play and let's talk about what is the smart answer, all things considered. Okay? So that would be my recommendation with regards to the proof issue. And you need, when somebody asks you to provide proof, you need to clear that other thing up first or you're not going to get anywhere. I just don't think the word is useful. What's more useful is say, here are my reasons for thinking this is an accurate belief. And if you disagree, what's wrong with my reasons or what reasons do you have to support the contrary? Now, that's a little bit stiff the way I characterize it, but that's what it comes down to in these conversations. You can state it in a softer way or a more relaxed way or whatever, but nevertheless, it really comes down to that. Okay? What are your views? What do you mean by that? And how did you come to that conclusion? Or if you're demanding something from me that I need to produce to justify my own beliefs, then what do you mean by that which you're demanding? And is that the kind of thing that is fair to demand to justify any other thing you believe? So let's just all play on an even playing field by the same rules. And it's not going to help to...

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

say, as many will, well, extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence. This is false. Who made that rule up? I don't know who it came from, somebody, David Hume or I don't know. But I just don't buy it. A lot depends on what a person thinks is an extraordinary claim. And if you say God exists, to an atheist that's an extraordinary claim because they don't believe it. They're operating from a different foundation, a different presupposition. But guess what? Atheism is really rare in this world. You know, the vast majority of human beings believe in something metaphysical beyond themselves and believe in some personal being of some sort. Maybe demons, maybe God, maybe Zeus, maybe whatever, but this is a natural response to the world that they experience. Something's going on. Somebody's up there pulling the strings, doing things. And occasionally they will affirm this by using language that is meant to dismiss God, but it still affirms the personal aspect of the involvement. I'm referring to mother in this case, not father, Mother Earth. Oh, we don't mean mother like a real mother. Well, you use this language. Why? Why are you anthropomorphizing chance because, gosh, it looks like somebody's messing with stuff. And that's why it's so easy to refer to Mother Nature. You're not interested in Father God, but mother will do for you. All right, well, that's an acknowledgment that, gee, it looks like somebody's pulling the strings. So what's the best explanation for that is the question. And that's the way I think the discussion should progress. And if people aren't willing to play ball on that, okay, well, then maybe they're not interested in really thinking through these issues. But I think that's a fair request to make. Let's take a quick break and then we'll get to some questions. When I return on Stand to Reason. Friends, if you like this broadcast, I know you'll love Hashtag STR Ask. It's our shorter 20-minute podcast where I am paired with the wonderful Amy Hall and together we answer the questions you send us on Twitter. Hashtag STR Ask is released twice a week, Mondays and Thursdays, and it's only about 20 minutes long, so it's perfect to listen to on your morning jog or while driving around running errands or cleaning your garage or just plain loafing at home. Amy and I tackle your questions on theology and ethics and culture and lots more offering our insight on the questions you're asking or the challenges you face. You can listen on Apple Podcasts or wherever you download your own shows. Just remember, send us your questions on Twitter using the name of the podcast, Hashtag STR Ask. That's Hashtag STR Ask. As a high school teacher, I always had a red pen close at hand. When I wasn't in front of my students teaching a lesson, you could find me assessing assignments, grading essays, and evaluating exams. The red pen played a crucial role in the educational development of my students. With it, I questioned their assumptions, exposed their errors, and challenged them to think critically. You see, a good teacher doesn't merely tell his students that they're wrong. A good teacher shows his students why they're wrong so they don't make the same mistakes twice. He corrects because he cares. Last year, I was scrolling through social media and frankly, I was discouraged at all the bad thinking that undergirded much of what I was reading. Then it hit me. What if someone applied the red pen to this flawed thinking? And Red Pen Logic with Mr. B. was born. In the last few months, Red Pen Logic has grown in popularity. Through our engaging and shareable educational graphics and videos, we are helping people, especially young people, assess bad thinking by using good thinking. And we have a lot of fun in the process. So here's your homework assignment. Like the Red Pen Logic Facebook page so you don't miss our next graphic. And subscribe at the Red Pen Logic YouTube channel so you don't miss a single video. Class dismissed. All right, we're five and a half weeks out, probably when you listen to this, closer to five weeks, from our final reality of this year. Last weekend, we were in Philadelphia, had a sold-out crowd. Every one of our realities, except for September in, where was that? Georgia, Atlanta. In Atlanta, have been sold out. Atlanta was the first time we've had a reality in that city. I think we had about a thousand people. And next season, I'm sure that it's going to be probably pretty close to full because Seattle was sold out ahead of time. Let's see, Minneapolis was sold out ahead of time. Dallas was sold out ahead of time. Philly last week was sold out six weeks ahead of time. And here we are, five and a half weeks out, and we're, you know, this auditorium can hold 2,500 for the Los Angeles event at, let's see, where is it? It's at Calvary Chapel Downey, I think. We already got 1,129 signed up. Five and a half weeks out and we're almost at half capacity for the main auditorium. Now we can have another 500 in the gym, so total we got about 3,000 seating, but that's with the 500 overflow. But lookit, we're going to sell this out. If you've been thinking about going to reality and you're in striking distance of SoCal, go to realityapologetics.com and sign up. And if you don't, do it soon. Somebody else is going to do it and get your seat. That's the deal. I pretty much guarantee this will be sold out. That's the way it's looking now, five and a half weeks out, and we just got a lot of people. In fact, we kind of chart early sign-ups, you know, early bird prices and stuff like that, and I think we're ahead of what we've ever been in the Southern Cal event in the last, what, 12 or 13 years that we've been doing this. So again, this is the last reality that Jay Warner Wallace is going to be involved in. He's got a workshop or a couple of workshops. He's also doing the last plenary session, and it's fabulous. I've seen it five times, and I just love sitting through it. I haven't gotten tired of Jay Warner, but he's got other things he's going to be doing. He won't be a standard part of reality, and we've been happy to have him all this time, but he is—I don't know of anybody better than Jim Wallace. I just don't. And he's been, you know, part of STR for a long, long time. So, LA, reality, April 24 and 25. April 24 and 25. I don't think I gave the date yet. So there you go. Okay, let's go to our open mic calls, and I've got Camille here with a question about Luke 12. Camille? Hi, Greg. My question to you is about the parables in Luke 12 and whether or not you think they are specifically directed at believers. And if so, I'm just having a hard time not reading them as implying that salvation can be lost. So I'd love to hear your thoughts. Yeah, that's a good question, Camille. I read through—just read through a little while ago the entire chapter, and there's a number of different things that are going on here. I actually—with maybe a couple of exceptions, I didn't get the sense that the parables potentially suggested someone could lose their salvation. Now, your first part of your question was whether the parables of Luke 12 were directed at believers. Well, that depends. There was some instruction at the front end that Jesus gives to His disciples that is a parallel passage to Matthew 10 where He's—when He sends out the disciples on their first short-term missionary journey that He is telling them, look out, it's going to be hard, all right? And you're going to run into trouble, but don't fear them. The Holy Spirit is there to help you, okay? So that is clearly directed at believers. But then He says in verse 8, everyone who confesses me before men, the Son will confess him also before the angels of God, but he who denies me before men will be denied before the angels of God. Now, I don't see that as Christians who are born again who fall into denial and therefore they're going to lose their salvation. I think He's talking about human beings that either affirm Christ or deny Christ. Believers are going to affirm. Non-believers will deny. And that is going to result in either their acceptance or their condemnation. But it's their actions that indicate where they're at before God. Now, when I flip the page, I see covetousness is denounced, and there's, you know, somebody says, teacher, tell my brother to divide the family inheritance with me. And Jesus said, lookit, be on your guard against every form of greed.

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

For not even when one has an abundance does his life consist of possessions, then he gives the parable of the rich man who gets a lot of valuables and says, okay, I'm fine, I'm all set. I'm, you know, be warm, be fed, whatever, your soul will be happy kind of thing. Take ease, eat, drink, and be merry. And God says, you fool, this very night your soul is required of you. And Jesus says, so is the man who stores up treasures for himself and is not rich towards God. So it's not God versus treasures. It's people who are trusting in treasures for themselves and they're leaving God out of it. And so I don't see that this is an evidence of somebody losing their salvation. I see it's an example of somebody who is trusting in other things than in God. And the foolishness of that approach, and so Jesus is trying to put things in their proper perspective. And right after that, he has, you know, the lilies of the field kind of appeal, you know, consider the ravens. They neither sow nor reap, have no storeroom or barn, yet God feeds them. Don't worry, your life is more than theirs. You know, and lilies of the field, they grow, neither toil nor spin, but Solomon, all his glory was not endowed as clothed as wonderfully as these. And so he says, seek first the kingdom and all the things that you need are going to be added. So once again, this is instruction. It doesn't seem like people who are believers are suddenly disqualified. Now there might be something in this section where Jesus is talking about the slaves whose master has left and when he returns, will they be ready? And again, I think this is communicating something about human beings, not necessarily Christians, though I can see maybe this is the part of the Luke 12 that you're thinking of here. He's thinking of human beings that are, in my view, either ready or not. But the faithful human being who's a slave of his master will be busy doing the things of his master when the master returns. And the worthless slave that is one in the household who isn't really faithful is not going to be rewarded. He's going to be punished. Now I take this to be an indicative. In other words, what Jesus is describing is behaviors indicate what the status of their soul actually is. Okay. And if they are not ready and they're messing around because the head of the household is gone, then the thief is going to come, you know, and catch him by surprise. But the one who is ready, that's the one that will benefit from it. Okay, here, you too be ready for the Son of Man is coming in an hour that you do not expect. Peter then says, Lord, are you addressing this parable to us or to everyone else as well? Now that's the question, isn't it? That you're asking, Camille. It's interesting. Jesus doesn't address it directly. The Lord said, who then is the faithful and sensible steward whom his master will put in charge of his servants to give them their rations at the proper time? Blessed is that slave whom his master finds so doing when he comes. Truly I say to you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions. So I think that Jesus is answering Peter's question indirectly. He's saying, I'm just saying, Hey, Peter, you want to know who am I talking about? I'm just saying. If you are faithful, you will be put in charge of more. If you're not faithful, look out. So I think he's making a broad statement about people, but it's not a workspace salvation because that would fly in the face of a number of other things he taught. Again, a lot of these things in my view are indicatives. That is the true child of God is going to be faithful and the false child of God will not be. The very last section is talking about the division that Jesus is going to cause. And what's kind of interesting, now I think about it, is that's what I was just talking about, the division between the faithful and unfaithful slaves. So Jesus said, you know, I do not suppose I came to grant peace on earth. I tell you, no, but rather division. And then he talks about the division that will be in the family, father against son, mother against daughter, etc. in virtue of faithfulness to him. So that's the way I see this passage. I mean, much more could be said about it, but I guess I just don't even see any intimation here that people are believers who end up losing their salvation. Incidentally, I would argue this point in a different fashion. I wouldn't use a parable to invade on this question one way or another. And the reason is because parables are a little tricky. They are meant to communicate general truths, but they are not to be mined for detail because that's not the way parables work. If you want to answer the question about the security of your salvation, you're going to have to find the answer for that in more overtly theological elements of the New Testament, particularly in Paul's writings who, and he deals with the grace and works and all of that stuff. And a number of passages, I think, make it really clear that the miracle of regeneration when it happens is irreversible. The miracle of regeneration when it happens is irreversible. Now specifying when it happens, because sometimes we can't tell for sure. The only way we can tell whether a person is regenerate is by their perseverance, the behavior, their lives, what they say, what they do, and how long they last. He who endures to the end will be saved. Why? Because the one who is saved does endure. Okay? And the one who is not saved doesn't endure. And that's what John said, that they went out from us, this is 1 John, maybe chapter 3, something like that. They went out from us so that it would be shown that they really weren't among us. Even, who is the guy in 2 Timothy? Paul traffics Demas, right? Travels with Demas, right? And there in 2 Timothy, Paul is writing to Timothy and he's on his way out. This is his swan song. And he says, Demas has deserted me. All that time with Paul. And then he says, Demas has deserted me having loved this present world. So it's the staying power that is the final and most reliable test of one's salvation, one's regeneration. Perseverance of the saints is the way Reformed people characterize it. And I think that sounds. The true saints will persevere. Well, how do you know who's the true saints, those who persevere? Now, they're not true in virtue of their perseverance. They are true in virtue of their faith in Christ and their regeneration. It is their perseverance that indicates to us their genuine regeneration. All right? All right. There you go, Camille. Let's see. We got Roxanne here has a question about Sarah and Hagar. In the Bible, at the time when Isaac was born, Hagar was with Sarah and Abraham and his son Ishmael. There was the one, the older son, was mocking and making fun of the little one. Sarah said she had to leave. I don't understand what happened or what it means. Can you explain that? Thank you. Oh, okay. You said that the older son was Ishmael was mocking the younger son. I read through the passage just a bit ago and I don't think, of course, I'm not sure what you're referring to, but it isn't the Sarah Hagar conflict was before the children were born. So, so God had promised a son from whom Abraham would birth a whole nation, that progeny. Well, it turns out Abraham and Sarah are getting older and older and they

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

Nothing's happening in that department. And so Sarah has Hagar, the handmaiden, her slave, if you will, her servant. And, you know, it's a strange custom, but apparently, the handmaiden could bear a child on behalf of Sarah by proxy. If Sarah wasn't going to get pregnant, which she wasn't, well then, Hagar can do it, and Sarah's bugged. I don't know why she's mad at Abraham, but it looks like she is. And so, here, take my handmaiden and go into her and bear a son. Well, he does that, and she gets pregnant. So now you've got Sarah, who is barren, and Hagar, her servant, who is blessed with a pregnancy. And this makes Hagar kind of snooty towards Sarah. And giving Sarah a hard time, she's got her nose in the air and blah, blah, blah. And so Sarah goes and she didn't respect her. So Sarah goes to her husband and says, man, this gal is disrespecting me. And he said, well, do to her whatever you want. Now, I don't understand that so much, not very responsible, but in any event. She does, and she treats her harshly, so badly that she leaves. And she is gone. And she's lamenting in the wilderness, this pregnant woman, and God appears to her and comforts her and gives her a promise that from her, that child would be a great nation, from the one who turned out to be Ishmael, would be a great nation. Now, it's clear, though, from other things that we read, that is not the line of promise that God had in mind that Abraham would be made into a great nation. I mean, actually, great nations, Ishmael and Isaac. But the promise of the future blessing to the world, to the Gentiles, to the Goyim, would come through Isaac, not Ishmael. And when you go to Galatians chapter, what is it, four? Let me look it up here. Yeah, Galatians chapter 4, we see Paul describing this event as an allegory. Yes, this is an allegory of something else that he's arguing. Now, in Galatians, he's talking about the contrast between living according to the law under the restrictions or requirements of the law and living under grace. And he's making the point to the Galatians, look, you learned Christ through grace, and now you are trying to be perfected by following the law. And this was because of false teachers that have come to create some problems there in the Galatian region, the Judaizers, who are saying, oh, you Gentiles, you want to believe in our Messiah? Okay, that's all right, but you've got to keep our law too. So what's it going to be? Is it law or grace? Is the point, and the book of Galatians answers that question, and it says, if righteousness comes to the law, then Christ died needlessly. That's Paul. And so trying to explain this relationship, he uses Hagar and Sarai and their respective children as an example of an allegory. And that's the word he uses, a type. It's representing something. You have a bondwoman and a free woman, the bondwoman Hagar and the free woman Sarai. And the bondwoman, it represents the law and those who are living under the law, where Sarai is the free woman and those are living under the freedom of the Spirit in the new covenant. So there's a parallel there between that relationship and the old covenant law and the new covenant of the Spirit and forgiveness. So the events of that that I just described from that passage in Genesis, oh, that's nasty stuff going on. That's just fallen people doing nasty stuff to each other. Nevertheless, God works in the context of those fallen people and He redeems the circumstance and makes a promise to Hagar and her son. So He shows mercy on them, but nevertheless, the grand design of God is coming through not the child of the bondwoman, but the child of the free woman. And that's the parallel that He discusses in Galatians chapter 4. So I think that Sarah sending Hagar away in itself was just nastiness. But that relationship between the two is an allegorical relationship of the burden that we have under the law and the freedom that we have under the Spirit. And Paul is arguing in the book of Galatians that we live under the freedom of the Spirit and not under the burden of the law. And that's Galatians 4. You can look that up and read it for yourself and you'll see that being worked out. All right, there you go. That's for Roxanne. Thank you for the call. All right, what do we got next here? All right, this is kind of an interesting question from Lisa about sin. Okay, I'll just let her explain it. Lisa. G'day, Greg. My name's Lisa from Brisbane, Australia. I just wanted to say thank you for sharing yourself with us and being sort of almost like the great cloud of witnesses for us to follow, although you're still here. But I've found your videos to be immensely helpful. And it's your tone and your approach to faith that is just so kind and it actually wants to draw you in to know more, which is a sign of a gifted teacher. But anyway, thank you for just sharing yourself with us. You're welcome. We've just got two questions. One that's sort of plagued me for a long time is how did sin go from being within an angel to being within a tree in a garden? And it doesn't make sense to me, but just wondering if you can shed any light on that. The second question is, I'm journeying with a Muslim iman. I still don't really know his position, but I do know he's very influential around the world. And in one of the conversations, it occurred to me that why wasn't Jesus' death on the cross just that event good enough for God to forgive us? Wouldn't Jesus' death be like a covering of forgiveness for us, but the cross seems to be a two-event approach to salvation because Jesus then took on the sins of the world. And I don't understand that event of taking on the sins of the world. Did it break some special power of sin for us or was that Jesus taking away the consequences of sin? I hope that makes sense, but I really would value hearing from your tank of wisdom and knowledge, please. And look forward to hearing from you. Thanks, Greg. Bye. Well, what a sweet question, Lisa. There's a lot going on here. So there are two separate things you're asking about. How did sin go from being within an angel to being within a tree in the garden? Okay, I think there's some misunderstanding here, Lisa, about sin. Sin is not really a stuff. It's not a thing. It's a condition. It's a way—it's a word we use to describe a condition of rebellion against God. And so sin didn't go from being within an angel—I presume you mean here Lucifer, the shining one, who became Satan, the devil— when he fell. It didn't go from being within Satan. Satan didn't have sin in him in that sense. Sometimes we talk about—we use the language, but we don't—sin isn't like in Satan like a pea is in a pod, and then sin went from Satan and it went to a different location. It went in a tree. What sin was was a way of describing the attitude of rebellion and pride that Satan had regarding God that was the core of his fall from his beautiful position that God had placed him in to the point of being the devil, the Satan. And the tree doesn't get the sin that Satan—that passed from Satan to the tree. What the tree was was a standard by which obedience could be measured. So when you have, maybe your kids, Lisa, presuming here, as a mom, you say, here's—don't cross this line. Well, the line isn't sin. Whatever that line is, don't go

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

Go across the street and play, or don't stay up so late, or whatever. You give a boundary. And the boundary isn't the sin. Sin isn't in the boundary. Sin is, the sin is the disobedience displayed by the person who goes past the boundary. So, the first question, I just think there's some confusion about the way you're thinking about sin, based on what you said, okay? So, Lucifer sinned when he tried to exalt himself above God. And then, in the garden, there was a prohibition that could measure the faithfulness or fidelity of Adam and Eve, our first parents, by their behavior. Are they going to obey God or not? And they disobeyed God. There was no sin in the tree. It isn't like they ate the fruit and the sin passed from the fruit into them. Their eating the fruit was simply a transgression of the boundary that God had given them, and it's the transgression, it's breaking the boundary, it's disobedience that is the condition of sin that was the occasion of sin, rebellion, that caused the fall of the human race. Okay, so that's the first issue. I hope that makes sense to you. Then there's a question about Jesus taking on the sins of the world, and what consequence it had, did it have, did it break some special power of sin for us, or was Jesus just taking away the consequences of sin? This is really a great question, and I actually think both things were going on, properly understood. Clearly, Jesus was a substitute for us, taking on to himself the consequence of the sins that we commit. He is the substitute. His death was a substitutionary atonement. So I use the word atonement because that's a familiar concept in the Mosaic law where animals were killed to atone for the sins of men, of the Jews. Now, that was a temporary provision because animals can't ultimately pay for people, but nevertheless, it was a picture of what was to come, and in Hebrews chapter 10, the writer talks about this. But the best characterization I can think of comes from Isaiah 53, and what Isaiah 53 says about this suffering servant, and this is a passage that's cited quite a number of times in the New Testament as having applied to Jesus. He is the suffering servant depicted in Isaiah 53, but look at some of the language here, and I'm just starting in verse, let's see, verse 4, and then I'm just skipping down through the text. You can read it yourself. Surely our griefs he himself bore, our sorrows he carried, yet we ourselves esteemed him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. But he was pierced through for our transgressions. He was crushed for our iniquities, and the chastening for our well-being fell upon him, and by his scourging we are healed. The Lord has caused the iniquity of us all to fall on him. And as for his generation, who considered that he was cut off from the land of the living for the transgression of my people to whom the stroke was due? See the representative death there, the substitutionary death captured in all of those words. The Lord was pleased to crush him, putting him to grief. He would render himself as a guilt offering, reference back to the blood of bulls and goats there. And as a result of the anguish of his soul, he will bear, my servant will justify the many as he will bear their iniquities, and further down he himself bore the sin of many. So it's like you can't read through that without having this notion that Jesus died for other people's sins jumping out at you at every single phrase there. So I think that's sound to say that Jesus certainly took away the consequences of sin in our life in the sense of the guilt because he paid for the guilt himself. He was the substitute. Now, the second part of this is, did he break the special power of sin for us? And I think the answer to that is yes. I'm not sure the best way to explain kind of the details of the theology here, but suffice it to say, when we put our faith in Jesus and we trust him because of what he did on our behalf, the first issue, by removing the consequences of sin, by becoming sin for us, he made him who knew no sin to be sin on our behalf, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. That's 2 Corinthians 5.20. So we got that going, but he did more. Once we put our trust in him, there is something that happens inside of us. We are changed. We are transformed. We are regenerated, given new life. If any man is in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things have passed away. Behold, all things have become new. And the Spirit now indwells us. It is the Spirit now who indwells us that gives us the capability of overcoming sin in our life. The law had no capability to do that. It is only the living Spirit within us that can help us to overcome sin. And so here we have the Galatians 5, we see towards the end of that chapter, this battle between the Spirit and the flesh, the Spirit and the flesh. We still have the flesh. It's still trying to do its nasty thing, but we have the Spirit now on our side helping us in our regenerated self to overcome. There's a battle going on. And Paul says, walk by the Spirit and you will not carry out the desires of the flesh. It's got a bunch of nasties of what the flesh entails in terms of its behaviors, and then we have the fruits of the Spirit, love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, gentleness, self-control. It's all there. So that is what gives us the power through Christ to overcome the flesh. Both things are true in their proper order, okay? It's a great question, Lisa. I'm glad you called, and I'm just always happy to make a clarification on that. Those issues are very important. All right, friends. Greg Koukl here for Stand to Reason. That's all the time we have right now. Give them heaven, okay? Bye-bye now. Thank you.
