# Anything But Christianity? Answering College Students’ Toughest Objections with Cliffe & Stuart Knechtle

- Publication date: 2026-07-21
- RSS GUID: `https://crossexamined.org/?p=103835`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Ladies and gentlemen, at first glance, when you look at the Bible, particularly much of what goes on in the Old Testament, you might be really hesitant to say, I believe this is true. What about slavery? What about so-called genocide? What about women? How does the Bible treat women? A lot of people have a lot of skepticism about this. They have a lot of doubts about the Christian faith. What do we say about that? How can we demolish those doubts if indeed Christianity is true? And by the way, how do we know it's true? Well, there are a few better to talk about that, particularly in sort of a high-stress environment, than the two guests I had on last week, the great Cliff and Stuart Keneckly, who are with us again, ladies and gentlemen. Here they are, all the way from Nashville. What are you guys doing in Nashville, by the way? What's happening? What are you doing there today? I like that Spanish crowd you have there. Yes. Yeah, exactly. We are going on a few different podcasts the next couple of days. And so we're gonna be hitting a bunch of different topics related to what we're talking about tonight, a lot of it around the book. And you've been here a few times. Vanderbilt is gonna be down the road here too, in terms of a spot that we're gonna be at in the near future. Yeah, and the book, ladies and gentlemen, I have it in Kindle. Here it is, Demolishing Doubt. And the subtitle is Discover How Your Deepest Questions Can Lead to Life-Giving Faith. This is a great book and it's written at a level that anyone can understand. It's not gonna be academic up in the clouds. It's the real-world stuff that Cliff and Stuart deal with every day. They go to a college campus. But it goes into more depth than they can when they're just answering questions. We all know that when we're answering questions on a college campus, you may get just a few minutes with a questioner and you can't cover every base. You can't cover every answer, every nuance. The book goes into more depth, so I highly encourage you to get Demolishing Doubt, ladies and gentlemen. But Cliff and Stuart, I remember William Lane Craig said this many years ago, talking about doubts. He said if you have a doubt, use that doubt as an opportunity to get answers to your doubt and drive that doubt into the ground. I mean, just do all the research that you can to discover all sides of the issue and follow the evidence where it leads. Cliff, over the years, I mean, you've been doing this since the 80s on college campuses. What have been the doubts that you've struggled with, even though, I mean, you're defending Christianity in some of the most hostile environments, what are the doubts you struggled with over the years and how did you overcome them? I can't see God. I'm a physical guy. And therefore, at times, I struggle with, why do I believe in an unseen God? I've never seen a dead man rise from the dead, so why would I believe that Jesus rose from the dead? And then when it comes to the ethics of the Bible, there are passages on slavery, on war, and on the role of women that are confusing, that have been abused and misinterpreted. And many of the people that I talk with have bought into those misinterpretations of the Bible, and it's a challenge to straighten them out. But it's also been a challenge for me to think through the slavery and the genocide issue and the women's issue. So those are some of the main issues. But then also, when I debated Bart Ehrman, he was a very nice guy and a very good debater. And so the whole issue of the reliability of the New Testament was stuck in my face in a pretty clear way by Dr. Ehrman at Chapel Hill. So those are some of the issues that have kept me up at night, trying to figure out how to think them through better. Let's talk about a couple of them. One is slavery. We've talked about that many times on this program before, ladies and gentlemen. The book Demolishing Doubt has a section in there that deals with it. If someone were to ask you the question, Cliff, on a college campus, hey, how can you believe the Bible? It condones slavery. Give me a couple of points. And the book goes into more detail, but just give me a couple of points that you might make in that issue. Well, I'll start off with all human beings are created in the image of God, which means slavery, denigrating a human being in any way, sexism, slavery, is evil. Secondly, what's the biggest miracle in the Old Testament? I think it's the exodus from Egypt, splitting of the Red Sea. Well, what's God doing there? He's delivering the Jews out of slavery. Then when you go to the New Testament, Jesus makes a direct frontal attack on racism in his first sermon in Luke chapter 4. And it's very clear that the Jews understand that he's saying God loves Gentiles just as much as he does Jews. And they try and throw him off a cliff to his death. And then in Galatians 3.28, Paul writes, in Christ, there is neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, male nor female. We're all one in Christ. And then by the time you get to Philemon, you've got Paul pleading with a slave owner to accept his runaway slave Onesimus back no longer as a slave, but as a brother in Christ. And in Revelation chapter 7, we read there are gonna be people of all tribes, nations, languages in heaven. So get used to it, friends. All human beings are gonna be in heaven, all types, all ethnic heritages, all ethnicities, all races. So racism is just simply not an option, and slavery is not an option if you read the Bible fairly. Yes, and indeed, if we had followed the biblical commands in the Old and the New Testament against man-stealing, the kind of slavery we had here in America, you know, 160 years ago, never would have happened because the Bible punishes man-stealing by death in the Old Testament. And of course, Paul also talks about how slave traders are evil in the New Testament. There's a lot more in the book Demolishing Doubt if you wanna go further, ladies and gentlemen. But Stuart, you've also dealt more on the psychological side of Christianity. You have a degree in psychology, and we all believe things for different reasons. It's not always about reason and logic. You cite a Harvard study, a recent Harvard study on this. What are the findings of that? Yeah, part of the reason why I have a degree in psychology and divinity is because I think the apologetics realm really needs to puncture a hole in the gigantic science now of psychology that's taking over the West. Like everything is therapeutic now. And there's something called the ABCs of psychology, anything but Christianity. And so quite literally, if you go back to Albert Ellis, who talks about musturbation, and he was just kind of this sicko sex addict who has had more of an emphasis, whether it's in the porn industry or beyond that very few people know about. As a psychoanalyst, yeah, he did some good stuff as well, but he was really a strong atheist who changed our culture, just like Sigmund Freud did, way more than we could ever imagine. I mean, I think Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche probably had the greatest impact, those three out of any other characters on our culture. And so for me in Demolishing Doubt, what I try and do is I, part of kind of my background is I show that there's so many good things about, say, going to church that this Harvard study shows that are the opposite of what is Sigmund Freud, all about wish fulfillment and, oh, nothing good can come from the Christian faith and Albert Ellis and others. But instead, this Harvard study shows if you take your kids to church growing up on a weekly basis, they have a 30% greater chance at being happier individuals in their 20s. If a woman starts going to church on a weekly basis, she has a 60% higher chance at getting off drugs. If you go to church on even a semi-regular basis, the opportunities to get out of depression, anxiety, and other emotional issues skyrocket. Your life expectancy grows. Obviously, giving grows. So there's so many different reasons why this Harvard study that's, it's basically taken at every 10 or so years, shows that you wanna go to church to benefit yourself, your family, and your society. And just because it's good, or you have good results doesn't mean it's true. But if it is true, it will lead to good results. And in this case... And by the way, even Richard Dawkins admitted this years ago, that, you know, faith does appear to have health benefits and benefits personally to people. And he begrudgingly pointed that out. Of course, if you believe that There's no meaning or purpose to life, the people that you loved are just sacks of chemicals that are just gonna go out of existence. That is very bleak and, of course, very depressing and probably will have negative health effects. Now, Cliff, you always ask people questions about the purpose of life. What kind of questions do you ask and what kind of responses do you get? These are non-Christians, by the way. One of the reasons I believe in Jesus is because the teachings of Jesus, a life committed to Jesus, is the best explanation of reality as I experience it. So the first question I ask is, why is human life valuable? You and I live in a culture where human rights is a big thing. Well, if you cut me open

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

Well, what's the context? What's the best explanation for human rights? It's simply that God created us with an innate value. He created us for a purpose. Secondly, I love to ask, what is the purpose of life? And if there is no God, life is a crapshoot. And you and I create our own purpose, which means if my purpose in life is to make money today and tomorrow I decide it's to be poor, I'm not right one day and wrong the other, because it's all relative. The third question I like to ask is, what's the basis of your ethics? We all have to make ethical decisions every day. We all have to decide whether we're going to cheat the IRS or pay our taxes. We're all going to have to decide, are we going to lie to our spouses and children and parents or tell them the truth? And my point is, when you look at life, if you lie, your relationships are going to be paper-thin. They're going to be so trivial, it's scary. The only way to build a meaningful relationship is to tell the truth and to live out the truth and not to cheat and not to lie, but to be a person of integrity. So why are we so lonely? Because we can't build deep relationships. And one of the biggest reasons we can't build deep relationships is because we can't tell the truth. We shade it, we mess with people's heads. And then finally, the fourth question that I like to ask is, not just why are we valuable, not just what's the purpose of life, not just what is the basis of ethics, but also fourthly, is there a life after death or not? And I'm sick and tired of going to funerals and walking out with guys who say to me, hey, Bob's up in heaven playing golf. Buddy, you don't believe God exists. And if there is no God, there's definitely no golf in heaven, and there's no heaven either. Death is the fertilizer pit, and we all are hunks of dust when we die. Jesus Christ says, no, I am the resurrection, the life. He who believes in me will live even though they die, and then he backed it up with an historical resurrection. So Christ meets us at the deepest issues that we all have to deal with. I'm sorry, you can't tell me you're just never going to deal with those issues. You're going to be agnostic. You have no choice. Life forces you to decide what's the basis of the worth of a human life. Is a human life valuable? Is your life valuable? Secondly, what's the purpose and meaning of life? Thirdly, what's the basis of ethics? And fourthly, is there a life after death or not? What kind of responses, Cliff, do you get when you ask, say, atheists or agnostics any of these questions? Scary. Totally scary. Yeah, I was speaking at Columbia University in New York City, and a professor invited me to come into his class, and they were discussing the different views of war, of Zwingli and Calvin, the Reformers. And it was an amazing class. And afterwards, I'm walking out with a professor who was a postdoc student from London, England. And I said, Professor, I can't thank you enough for having me in that class. That was a treat to listen to the thinking and depth of study going on. Now, let me ask you, sir, what are you living for? That's my first question. And my second question is, what's the evidence that whatever it is you're living for is true? And this brilliant postdoc student from London, England at Columbia University said, Please don't ask me those questions. I'm not prepared to answer them. That's scary. And he's teaching your kids, ladies and gentlemen. Yep. Yeah. At a high price. That's right. That's right. Well, it is true. If there is no purpose, there is no ultimate meaning, and there is no ultimate right way to live or wrong way to live. Exactly, Frank. And it's scary that we send our kids off to these institutions with people who haven't fully investigated that question or are too afraid to investigate that question. Now, the book also, again, the book, ladies and gentlemen, called Demolishing Doubt by my guests today, Cliff and Stuart Kneckley. You've got a chapter in here on, Was Jesus an Ethical Genius? An ethical genius. What do you discover in that chapter? I think Robert Coles oftentimes is what we reference when it comes to, you know, he was at Harvard for so long, such a respected professor there. And he talked about how all other ethical writings are simply footnotes to the Sermon on the Mount. And I think the Sermon on the Mount has stood the test of time. It is arguably, and probably not even arguably actually, the most famous sermon ever given and connected there with the Sermon on the Plain. So if you talk about Judeo-Christian values and you talk about how, whether it's peacemaking, whether it's compassion, whether it's forgiveness, the list goes on and on, all of it just kind of really just trickles down from the Sermon on the Mount. And the idea that compassion or empathy, forgiveness, sacrifice, human rights, that all of these ideas are somehow natural to us is absurd. They're supernatural. They're way above natural. So it's really the atheist who believes in the supernatural in some ways in the sense of he's accusing us of being supernatural, but it's him who's being ridiculous in living at a base level saying that we shouldn't live by those things, even though they say we should. They, according to their worldview, are saying we shouldn't because we're just highly evolved animals. But we're the ones coming in here saying, yes, that is very natural if we are just raised red in tooth and claw and simply beasts. But no, we live in such a way where we are not just above the beasts, but way above the beasts in how we think and how we want to treat each other, even to our own demise. You know, I was thinking about how an atheist, too, is a strictly just buys into the evolutionary theory and process. I guarantee you, if you threw a ball out, played a little dirty trick on a kid chasing a ball out into the street, that that atheist, no matter how selfish, there's a very good chance that he would go diving out into the street to save that kid's life and give up his own life to do so. And that just shows, even though whether you believe in evolution or not, I think God has created us to sacrifice and to put our neck out there on the line for someone else. And so it all comes down to the Sermon on the Mount. And Frank, to your earlier point, Richard Dawkins in the last couple of years started calling himself a cultural Christian. So I think he likes the Sermon on the Mount a little bit more than he leads on. You also talk about the transcendence of our ability to reason. So Stuart, you just mentioned that some atheists will say, well, we're just a God-intoxicated apes. We're nothing more than molecules in motion. You know, we're molecular machines. We're just moist robots. Of course, if we were just moist robots, how would we know that? Right? So Cliff, that's covered here in the book. How do you, or what do you say when people say, well, we're just molecular machines, but you ought to be reasonable? What do you, what do you, how do you respond to people who say things like that? You believe in a miracle, my friend. You believe that non-reason has made, produced reason. That is a miracle. The only problem is, friend, you don't have a miracle worker. I love what Albert Einstein said when he said, the most incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it is comprehensible. That's a tremendous point. The universe is amazingly complex. Now we've got this thing called a brain. What on earth allows us to use something called a brain to unlock the secrets of the universe? So Einstein is spot on. Why on earth do we have the capacity to understand the secrets of the universe? It's far more plausible. It's far more reasonable to say, in the beginning, God, than it is to say, in the beginning, hydrogen. Because what you have then is you've got the immaterial matter and energy creating the rational mind. No, forget it. Yeah, but if you believe in evolution, Cliff, you just believe the mind evolved. Oh, really? When was the last time you trusted the thoughts of a monkey? And if a human brain is simply a highly developed monkey's brain, why on earth do you trust your brain? Would you trust the thoughts of a monkey? So the complexity of reason, the importance of reason in all of our lives, I think is a solid piece of evidence that some type of God exists. You know, just this past Friday, I had the privilege of speaking at the Billy Graham organization here. And I know, Cliff, you had connections to Leighton Ford, who was Billy Graham's brother-in-law. And you've probably been down here in Charlotte several times at the Billy Graham library and all this. Anyway, I was doing a evangelism conference with the great Erwin Lutzer. And by the way, Erwin has like the best dry jokes. He said, my doctor said that if I just worked out for six weeks in a row, I could add 15 years to my life. And he's right, because after six weeks, I already feel 15 years older. So anyway, Erwin's in his mid-80s, and we were there just talking about, you know, evangelism and questions that we could ask people. And it's, you know how you get older, Cliff, you start to lose your train of... Yes, I do have experience that too often

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

The crux of what we kept talking about, to all these people who are trying to learn how to better evangelize, it was two things. Number one, it's a process, and more than harvesting most of the time, you're gardening, right? You're just moving people incrementally toward Jesus, or at least away from their current worldview. That's number one. And the key to doing that is asking questions rather than making statements. So you guys do that so well on a college campus. For those who haven't seen you in action, we're gonna put links to the YouTube channel and the Instagram page in the show notes here. But tell people how, when you go to a college campus, how you typically run the event and then what happens, because most of it's Q&A. There's just an intro you do, then what happens after that? Stuart, why don't you take that? Yeah, well, way back in the day. So before the kind of the social media tsunami, I got to experience a lot more of the awkward side of it that I always really appreciated my dad for, I mean, going back to the earliest of days, but I don't know, in the 90s, you'd get a really big crowd and then it kind of slowly plateaued. But in the plateauing of days of sort of when I started, you'd get out there, you'd have the invite from InterVarsity or somebody like InterVarsity, but you'd still have to start your own crowd. And so you'd have, even if you had 10 InterVarsity students out there, it'd still be hard. And so there was a very awkward first 10, 15, 20 minutes where you have to find a way to get some kind of angry atheist to step up. So that was about 10 years ago. Now it's way more natural. You know, you go, you park up at one of these schools that invites us, a Bible Belt school, for example, and sometimes there's already 300, 400, 500 students out there at some of the really big ones, which is crazy. That's always unexpected when we're there. Typically, they're not that big, but the ones that are that big, let's just say you're off and running from the very start. But then the challenge becomes, all right, so it's a crowd that's literally 10 times the size of the one you had a few years ago, but these are all Sunday school type, pop Sunday school questions. How do you get this angry atheist back to come complain again about how you Christians are so narrow minded and bigoted? So that's it, Frank. I'll stop it there for a second. Well, well, right here in the book, though, again, the book's Demolishing Doubt, ladies and gentlemen, by Stuart and Cliff Kneekly in the section on the problematic areas of Scripture, and this being women, you point to the part where Paul says women ought to be silent in the church. But then you point out the context of that passage. Either of you want to unpack that? Well, so we maybe just agree on this one a little bit. Yeah, we do, I think. Where do we disagree? We try and disagree. So basically, when I was in seminary and did a little bit of cross-cultural study on this one, typically when a woman was asked to remain silent, or a man for that matter, it's because they already knew the material. And so if you were asked to remain silent, it's the ones who were supposed to be talking and asking questions were the ones who didn't know the material yet. Now, obviously, you're going to go from the other angle, which is probably more likely overall in terms of the conception of what's going on. Yeah, because I don't see that in the book, Stuart. I think Dad won out. You overpowered me, I know, Frank. It doesn't say that. The seniority card was played. No, no, no, no. I just wrote a higher percentage of the book. I got more words in. That's all. That's all that happened. But called prostitution, right? That's what I'm thinking. Yeah, it more appears that it was dealing with disorganized worship. Right. Do you want to unpack that further, Cliff? Sure. When you read the more difficult passages in the Bible, like 1 Corinthians 11 and 14, like 1 Timothy chapter 2, you've got to study the context very, very carefully. All you've got to do to figure out what's going on is watch the movie Yentl. Barbra Streisand plays a young woman who is not allowed to get an education because she's a woman. So she disguises herself as a guy in order that she can go to school. How tragic. But that's the culture that Paul is addressing. And when you read 1 Timothy 2, who's Paul writing to? He's writing to Timothy. Where is the guy pastoring? He's pastoring in Ephesus. When you read about Ephesus in Acts, they were into goddess worship. Diana of the Ephesians they worshiped. And the temple was a messed up place there, Diana of the Ephesians. At the top of the leadership were virgin women. Under them were castrated men. And under them were thousands of prostitutes. And you went to the temple to have sex with a prostitute as a way to know God. Now to say that it's a sexually chaotic atmosphere is a mild understatement. And Timothy's going nuts. How on earth do we control and teach the followers of Christ what it looks like to be a sexually pure person, but to enjoy sex as a gift from God within the context of marriage, a lifelong commitment between a man and a woman till death parts us? And so Paul writes some interesting things there in 1 Timothy chapter 2. And I think a lot of it has to do with you're dealing with goddess worship. You're dealing with a totally sexually messed up place. You're dealing with incredible sexism expressed through gnosticism and expressed in all of the different cultures that women were inferior. And Paul ends 1 Timothy 2 by saying, And women will be saved through childbearing. You've got to be kidding me, Paul. You're telling me that the way to heaven for women is to have sex and have a baby? No, no. Paul is attacking, I'm convinced, the gnostic idea that sex and the body are evil and having babies are evil. And he's saying, no, you have sex within marriage. You bring children into the world. That's a gift from God. And you will be saved as you go through childbearing. Childbearing is not the way to heaven. It's as you continue on in faith and good deeds. And yes, that includes sex within the context of a lifelong commitment. That's marriage. And bringing little children into the world, which is an incredibly creative gift from God. So when you study the context that Timothy is in there in Ephesus and what Paul writes there in 1 Timothy chapter 2, you begin to understand, whoa, some of this complex, difficult to understand language makes a little bit more sense than I ever thought. There's more in the book Demolishing Doubt, ladies and gentlemen, by Cliff and Stuart Keneckly. You ought to pick up the book. It's quite excellent. And I also want to point out that it's not often looked at from the opposite side. And what I mean by that is in when Paul's writing these passages, a man in, say, Corinth or Ephesus as a Roman.

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

but a woman couldn't. A woman was supposed to be faithful to the man. Paul comes along and tells men, you've got to be faithful to your wife. That's totally revolutionary in that mindset and it's like the opposite of feminism today. You know, feminism tells today's women to act like men in the sense, don't be monogamous, sleep around, do whatever you want. Whereas Paul is telling men to act more like women at the time, to be monogamous and to be faithful to your partner, your married partner. This is totally revolutionary in the day and people today have this moral standard they apply to the Bible, and yet they don't have a source for that standard and secondly, they don't know the context and they don't understand what restrictions Paul's putting on men as he liberates women. You know, I mean, it's just It's so ingrained too because last night we had an athlete come up to us in the airport from Bob Jones, and historically, Bob Jones, many people would say is a tremendously sexist school. I had this woman who's a third wave feminist take me out to dinner once. She took me out because she's a third wave feminist. And basically, she wanted to talk about this very topic and I gave her a lot of the groundwork that we're talking about right now, and she just said, no way, I don't believe any of it. Impossible. I know all about this school. And she was talking about this very school. And so I think it just shows, Frank, to your point, how culturally ingrained this all is that a lot, whether it's women or men, but especially third wave feminists, don't want to peek under the hood. They don't want to give men or women, anybody who's not a strong, angry third wave feminist, an opportunity to say, hey actually, things like the Me Too movement came from Christian principles. So you're marching to Christianity. The term, you know, progressive, came from the Christian worldview, on and on. And so it's just hilarious, like you're stating, how many people just don't realize what they speak most loudly for and most loudly against is all contradictory to what they, the narratives that they're pushing. Yeah, they have to steal a standard from God to even make the argument. That's part of the problem. And so much of this, ladies and gentlemen, is knowing the Bible in context. You have to know the context to know what it really means and too often we take it out of context. We're starting a brand new course called The Bible You Never Knew. It starts August 3rd. I'll be your instructor. And it goes through so much of the typology of the Old Testament. Because you know, in Luke 24, ladies and gentlemen, Jesus explains to the disciples on the road to Emmaus that the entire Old Testament is about him. You go, how could the Old Testament be about Jesus? Well ladies and gentlemen, once you start looking at the people in the Old Testament as, and you realize how they're foreshadowing Jesus, you can't unsee that. It totally opens up a way of looking at the Scriptures that Jesus had and the apostles had. So if you want to be a part of that course, go to cross examine.org, click on online courses. You'll see The Bible You Never Knew. This is the first time we're running this. It's 13 hours of video long. I'll be your instructor. If you take the premium version, you'll be on with me at least five occasions, maybe six, for live Q&A Zoom sessions. I also want to mention that the book, The War on Reality, is coming out in September and it would help us greatly if you would pre-order this book in paperback. The subtitle is Recovering Truth in a World That Celebrates Lies. Some of the lies we've been talking about here on this program. But this book right here that I co-wrote with Phoenix Hayes is going to help you navigate all the lies that you've been told regarding so many of the things, whether it's gender, whether it's God, whether it's evolution, whether it's even some of the issues that go on in the church about prosperity gospel, we cover that. We cover Marxism, oppressor. We cover should Christians be involved in politics. We cover, tragically, the murder of Charlie Kirk in chapter one. So check out The War on Reality, Recovering Truth in a World That Celebrates Lies. And also, you got to get the book. You say, well, Frank, why are you always talking about books? You know, ladies and gentlemen, there's only three ways you can learn. You can learn directly from God. That's divine revelation. You can learn from your own experience or you can learn from someone else's experience. Well, God doesn't reveal everything to us and you don't have enough time to learn from your own experience. You need to learn from other people and that's what books do. They help you learn from other people who are further down the road in a particular topic than you are. And I can tell you, there's nobody further down the road on how to deal with college kids and high school kids than Cliff Keneckly and his son, Stuart. So you need to get Demolishing Doubt, this brand new book that we're talking about today, and it's written for anybody. Anybody can understand what they're talking about and it can reorient your perspective to the truth. So get Demolishing Doubt. And there's so much this book covers that we can't cover here today, but I do want to cover one of the biggest topics that you cover in the book, Cliff and Stuart, and that is the resurrection of Jesus. In fact, you write that over the past several decades, there's an explosion of scholarship centered on the historicity of the resurrection. So what evidence do we have for the resurrection? Because if the resurrection is true, Christianity is true. Who wants to take that? Firstly, that Jesus died on a cross. 98.8% of scholars, historians across the nation agree that Jesus actually died on that cross. He did not just swoon. It wasn't just somehow a part of him that left his body. No, that guy was dead on that cross. Obviously, Romans were professional murderers, homicidal maniacs. Secondly, he was taken down from that cross and buried in a well-known tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, very high up in the Sanhedrin. He would have lost his entire reputation, a lot of money too, by doing so. So it just made a mockery of himself. Why would he have done that to begin with? So they knew where the tomb was. Thirdly, out of the Gospel of Matthew, enemy attestation, a great rumor around that was spread by the Romans that, let's just say the disciples stole the body. And so right within Matthew, it's incredible, you have enemy attestation going on. Fourthly, you have Reformed women showing up, being the first ones, being the first evangelists, really, because they show up and the message is given to them that this incredible Christ of yours is actually risen from the dead. And they go back and obviously the men are very slow. Don't listen to them. Which especially back then made sense. And then you have Josephus and others, extra biblical sources, talking even about how ridiculous that women were the first ones to the tomb. And a couple more lines of evidence, but my favorite one that I did not include and flesh out in there is basically what happened to the known world upon the resurrection within just a first few weeks, months, and years. I mean, the whole, the Roman Empire is flipped upside down. And this one famous agnostic Japanese artist said, hey, look, you can be like me and say, you don't know, or you can be an atheist and say, there's no way something like the resurrection occurred. Fine. But then you must posit some type of alternative spark and match that created this entire conflagration over why in the world would Jews, who'd be the last ones to ever believe that Jesus Christ would have risen from the dead, all of a sudden overnight, they became Christians and not just Jews. So I, that actually is my favorite piece. When I'm, we oftentimes get asked, hey, what's your favorite piece of evidence around the resurrection? That's oddly enough, my favorite piece that will have to come in part two of the book. Um, that I think more work needs to be done on that point as well. Yeah, you know, it's been recently discovered or at least scholarship is moving in this direction that they even think Luke was a Jew. And if that's the case, every writer of the New Testament is a Jew. Why are they inventing a theology they didn't believe in? Right? They didn't believe a man could claim to be God. That's blasphemy. They didn't think one guy would rise from the dead at the middle of time to save everybody. They knew it all rise from the dead at the end of time because that's what Isaiah and Daniel say. But I always ask people, what motive would these Jews have to invent this and then suffer for it? Have you ever, Cliff, have you ever had any good counter-argument or what's the counter-argument that the atheists and the skeptics bring when you bring this up? Like, how do they explain the data? Because as Stuart just mentioned, the data comes from scholarship. This isn't just Christian apologists saying, Oh yeah,

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

Jesus died and, oh yeah, his disciples thought he rose from the dead. Even atheists scholars are saying, yeah, his disciples thought he rose from the dead. So what kind of explanation do the skeptics have for this, to explain this? I've never heard a good explanation. All of the most intelligent atheists that I've ever had to debate or dialogue with basically start with the philosophical presupposition of naturalism. And if you start with naturalism, obviously it's impossible that a dead man rises from the dead. And that, I'm convinced, is the real issue. And that's the argument that they put forth. How can you believe there's life after death in light of the fact you've never seen anybody rise from the dead? And then they tie that into the philosophical presupposition that there is no supernatural God, which means there is no life after death. And I've never seen anybody rise from the dead, so what kind of a quack are you, Cliff, for believing that the dead Christ really rose from the dead? So they can hide behind different intellectual shenanigans, but I think it really comes down to that. It's a question of presupposition of where do you begin? Do you begin with a supernatural God, then a resurrection is possible? But if you begin with the presupposition that there's no supernatural God, then you're obviously an idiot for believing that Jesus rose from the dead. But, as you say, they don't really have a counter-argument for it. Like, how do you explain the data if he didn't rise from the dead? That's the... it amazes me that people think they can just smell rotten eggs and not lay a better one, right? Like, they'll say, okay, well, your, you know, your position's rotten. Well, how do you explain the data? Oh, I don't have any obligation to explain it. No, you, if you're a thinking person, you have to come up with some kind of theory to explain the data. How did Jesus of Nazareth become the most influential human being in history after his followers were persecuted for the first 300 years of the church? How did he become the most influential human being in history if there wasn't something supernatural that happened to his body? What? I don't... I don't see any way around that. Even Bart Ehrman, who you debated, he won't take a position, Cliff. He won't take a pos... He won't say it's hallucinations. He knows that doesn't work. He's not going to say any of the other standard swoon theory or wrong tomb. He just remains agnostic and doesn't come up with any kind of counter-argument other than I think you say anti-supernatural. Yeah. Which shows the intellectual dishonesty of the whole argument. You're going to have to put your head on your pillow tonight. I'm going to have to put my head on my pillow tonight. The question is, who or what are you living for? And what's the evidence that what you are living for is correct? And the challenging thing is, people don't want to answer that. People do not want to answer that because they have not clearly thought through, what am I living for or who am I living for, and what's the evidence that whatever it is I am living for is reliable? And evidence presupposes this is an orderly world and we have minds that can discover evidence and follow that evidence where it leads. And that's not even true on atheism. This is, we're just dancing to our DNA, as Richard Dawkins says. We're not following evidence. We're just reacting. We're not, we're not reasoning. That's the ironic thing about all this. And you cover this so well, by the way, in the book, Demolishing Doubt, ladies and gentlemen. If you don't have Demolishing Doubt, you really need to get it. Now, Stuart, you're dealing more on, you're the, let me put it this way. I've just realized this recently, that you always hear Christianity is not a sprint, you know, it's a marathon. Actually, it's not even a marathon. Christianity is not a sprint. It's not a marathon. It's a relay race where we hand the baton to the next generation. Hopefully, we've made them disciples. Your dad has helped make you a disciple. But from your perspective, your generation, say 20s, 30s, maybe early 40s, what are the major issues that you see in that generation that people are dealing with that are maybe barricades or obstacles for them from accepting the Christian worldview? Yeah, I look at you two, and I think of that Eugene Peterson book, A Long Obedience Upward, which I really appreciate about both of you, especially in an age of, obviously, a lot of hypocrisy going on for religious and non-religious types. But Christian mentor is so key to obviously staying strong, so I appreciate both of you a ton for that, respect the heck out of both of you for that. I think the biggest obstacles for this generation is it still remains the sex ethic. Sadly, you know, you saw that statistic in Christianity Today where 75% of evangelicals think that living with somebody who's not your spouse is just fine, cohabitating, because you've got to test drive the vehicle. So I think we're naturalizing it now, even from a Christian standpoint. But I still typically, I sit like this one guy at Yale two years ago. We debated for 20 minutes, really sharp kid. At the very end, I just said, I just peeled back a couple layers, and I said, whoa, hold on here. I'm all of a sudden noticing a strong volitional bias, and I think everybody in the crowd here is too. And he started giggling, laughing awkwardly, because he started to realize, wow, my slip truly is showing right now. And sure enough, it was all just a sexual piece where he was saying, fine, yes, yes, I don't have an intellectual issue with the Christian worldview. I do realize it's all, I don't want anybody telling me what to do with, well, how I'm going to do things in the bedroom and with who and at what point. So that's still number one, I find. Number two would be technology and busyness. And so in the Screwtape Letters, C.S. Lewis, when he talks clearly, you know, Wormwood, hey, look, just busy them. As soon as he gets down the stairs, get him into his newspaper. Now, it's as soon as somebody takes that first step out of bed, just get him into their phone. And if you do that, we have them. So I think, you know, Arthur Brooks, for example, Harvard psychologist, talks about the thing we need most right now for kids is something called boredom. Because boredom is when you start to ask the bigger questions of life and like where's meaning come from, for example. The third one would still be, I think, suffering. And I think suffering goes either way, though. I think a lot of the revival right now going on is actually because of suffering. But I think a lot of people are still, in my generation, kept away from the faith because of suffering, because they become hardened and cynical towards what they see, whether it's the evil in politics, whether it's the suffering within divorce and the family breakdown. They see these things and they say, how could there be a good God? And so they just turn into nihilists. And it's like one of my best friends said to me a number of years ago, he said, hey, look, Stuart, I'm never going to get married, never going to have kids. Doesn't make sense to do so in a world like we live in today. And I thought that was honest. And I thought he had a very good point. If there's no, if there's no world beyond this world, if this is not a world with windows, like C.S. Lewis talked about, then nihilism makes a lot of sense. And you may as well try as hard as you can to be a happy nihilist, which are some of the most kind of insincere types I know, but they do exist, especially in Texas. And so I think that's, I think those are three or four of them. Cliff, you've been doing this a long time. As you look back at where you've been and all the campuses you've been to and all the questions you've answered, what advice would you give for our listeners right now? Say top two or three pieces of advice you would give them to say, if you're going to be firm in your faith and bold in your faith, do these, say, three things. What would you say? First of all, hate sin and love Jesus. So much of this comes down to faith in Christ and hatred of evil and sin. Obviously, when you put your faith in Christ, one of the main things he does is by his Holy Spirit, he sensitizes our consciences. And when our consciences get sensitized, we begin to mourn about evil in the world and evil in our own hearts. And then that drives us to Christ for forgiveness and for the power to change and to make this world a better world. Secondly, I would encourage everybody to study as hard as you can. I really appreciated your comments on how you learn, Frank. And one of the ways we learn is by reading, by understanding the thinking of others who are more intelligent than we are. I have learned so much over the past 46 years from people who are far more intelligent than I will ever be. And the way I did it was just by asking questions. So every time I get with someone who I respect, I just start asking them questions to build up my bank of knowledge so that I can answer people more precisely, more accurately, more correctly. So studying is crucial and asking questions is crucial. And then you pray, Lord, use me

### 00:50:00 - 00:56:05

Two ears. One voice says, oh, Cliff, you did a great job. That's pride. And the other voice says, Cliff, you're a loser. You did a lousy job. And that is self-flagellation and just a negative form of pride. Now, the challenge is to forget myself, to be caught up in God's majesty and his love for people, and to realize that it's his Holy Spirit that converts people. When I was in seminary at Gordon-Conwell, I used to go into Boston on the weekends. And I bumped into the combat zone, which is where prostitution was legalized in an attempt to contain prostitution in Boston. I would go into bars where there were a lot of men on vacation, quote-unquote, trying to hook up with some prostitute. And in those bars, every time the Celtics or the Bruins would lose a game, some half-drunk guy would stand up and curse God at the top of his lungs. And so I decided, okay, guys, equal time. I'm gonna stand up and say something positive about God at the top of my lungs. And so I began to preach in these bars in inner-city Boston, and I learned a lot from that. And I didn't have the faintest idea I'd be doing open-air dialogue on university campuses, but obviously God used that experience of bar preaching while I was in seminary in Boston to teach me an awful lot. And one thing he taught me was, one night, a reporter from the Boston Globe came with me. And he followed me around to these different bars, watched and listened in to my conversations. And then at the end of the night, he said, Cliff, it's been great to be with you, but I gotta go home now. But I got a question for you, Cliff. From what I've seen, nobody has agreed with you. Nobody is taking you seriously. How do you deal with striking out so often? And I said, well, sir, you gotta understand something. A person coming to faith in Christ is like a chain. And there are many links in a chain. And you're right, I didn't have any good, positive responses tonight. But often, I am the first link in the chain of a person coming to Christ, or I'm a middle link in the chain of a person coming to Christ, and at times, I have the privilege of being the last link. But the point is, I better be a faithful link, be I the first link, a middle link, or the last link. And that reporter looked at me and said, hmm, that is interesting. And then he walked away. So I've got to remember that as I communicate Christ. I'm gonna be the first link, a middle link, or the last link. And we all do. Not many of us are gonna have the privilege of regularly seeing people come to faith in Christ. That's a long process, but we're all gonna be good links in that chain. Amen to that. Ladies and gentlemen, the book Demolishing Doubt will help you be a good link somewhere along the chain of somebody coming to Christ, so you need to pick it up. Now, Stuart, tell us what the websites are, and the YouTube channel, and where people can connect with you guys. Yeah, so Instagram for the universities we'll be at is Stuart_Connectly. And then the YouTube channel is Give Me an Answer with Stuart and Cliff Connectly, where all those debates will be. And so hope to see you guys on one of those sites and in person. Also, you guys are preaching every Sunday up there in New Canaan, Connecticut. Cliff, where is that church, and how do people attend? Where do they go to the web? What website do they go to? Well, you have to ask Stuart about websites. I am really ignorant. But we meet at 9:30 every Sunday morning at Saks Middle School in New Canaan, Connecticut, and we'd love to invite you to join us. 9:30 Sunday morning, Saks Middle School, the main auditorium in New Canaan, Connecticut. What's the website? Stuart, what about the website? Yeah, what's that? Give me an answer with Stuart and Cliff Connectly, where all those debates will be. It's just gracecommunitychurch.org. And now you guys are coming up here. We're coming up. You're in the middle of summer now, but come September, maybe even late August, you guys will be on some college campuses. Where are you going to be, and where can people track where you're going to be online? Well, Stuart will do the online answer. I'll tell you where we're going to be. September 8 and 9, we're going to be at the University of Maryland. And then September 14 and 15, we're going to be at Rutgers University in New Jersey. And then September 29 and 30, we're going to be at Texas A&M in College Station, Texas. And you can just Facebook, Give Me an Answer, Instagram or account, Stuart underscore Connectly. Any of those, I'll be putting it up for times and dates and any events around those. Yeah, so keep in mind, ladies and gentlemen, those are open to the public. Even though they're on college campuses, you can just come on the college campus and attend any of these events like our events. You can do the same thing. So look out for Cliff and Stuart. They're coming somewhere near you, hopefully. So University of Maryland, Rutgers University, Texas A&M. And there'll be more in October and probably November as well. So keep track of them. Pray for them. You know, they had to take their events inside since Charlie, but they still want to attract people from outside into these venues, ladies and gentlemen. So support what Stuart and Cliff are doing. They do a great job at it. And take a look at their Instagram page, YouTube channel, website, church website, because they're doing a lot of great work and we need more and more people to go out there and actually interact with people in the most anti-Christian real estate in the country. And tragically, that's the college campus. So thanks for the great work you guys are doing. Thank you, thank you, thank you for what you're doing, guys. Keep it up. Keep going, brother. Yeah, you as well. That's Cliff and Stuart Connectly, ladies and gentlemen. Check them out online. Also, Demolishing Doubt, the brand new book just came out. I think it's Zondervan. Is it Zondervan did that? That's right. It's Zondervan. Check it out. Also see them on college campuses. And Lord willing, ladies and gentlemen, we'll be back here in next week for another edition. God bless.
