# Objections to Last Week’s Shows on Antisemitism

- Publication date: 2026-04-24
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/c4d9b823-dad5-3637-84d0-f1f414ff2213`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

Welcome, friends, to Stand to Reason. Greg Kokel here, and I'm glad you're part of our show today. Before I get started responding to responses to last week, which have been interesting, to probably put it mildly, I wanted to remind you, and I apologize, this is going on on Friday, and Friday is when Reality starts, our last Reality of the season. Nevertheless, we have, as of Tuesday here of the week, which is what I'm recording, we have 1,643 people signed up, and they're still coming in here this last week. I'm hoping we get close to 2,000, but it's going to be a great final session, a great finale to a year of magnificent Realities in which almost every one of them was sold out. Atlanta wasn't sold out, and this one wasn't sold out, and that's because they were new venues in both cases. But it's great. Jay Warner Wallace, of course, is going to be here for the last time. I mentioned that in the past. Jason Jimenez is going to be part of the lineup. Sean McDowell is part of the lineup on Friday night, and I'll be following Sean on the big stage talking about worldview and specifically about atheism versus theism. Of course, Megan and Tripp Allman, and all the rest of our team is going to be there too. RealityApologetics.com is the website to go to for all the information and to sign up and be part of our magnificent enterprise. I have been going, this will be my seventh. Obviously, I've been going every session. Last year, I missed a few because I was grounded by my surgeon, but I didn't miss any this year. And I still sit through the sessions because I'm enjoying them so much, not only the teaching, but what Drew Worsham, the way he holds everything together. He's kind of the glue that holds all of the pieces together. Wonderful, the illusionist. He's not a magician, he's an illusionist, but he's great. And he does a super job. So I hope to see you there. If you haven't decided yet, and you're within driving distance of, what, Calvary Chapel Downey is where we're holding it. Maybe you're getting this in the morning, this podcast. Please come out for your good, not for mine, but for yours, all right? I also wanted to mention that we are still looking for outposts in Alaska, in Hawaii, in Kansas, in Massachusetts, in Mississippi, in North Dakota, in Rhode Island, in Vermont, and in Wyoming. Those are the states, the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 states that remain that do not have representation of an STR outpost. And you can get information by going to str.org slash outposts to find out more about what outposts are and how you can be part of them. So just a couple of things to keep you going here. Tim Barnett will be speaking at the Equip conference in Barrie, B-A-R-R-I-E, Ontario, Canada, on Friday and Saturday, May 1st and 2nd. And he'll also speak at the Western Youth Summit in Langley, British Columbia, on Friday, May 23rd. Tripp Allman will be at Summit's summer conference May 22nd and June 1st, 4th, and 15th and 16th. And all of our team's events are available at str.org slash events. And if you're thinking about booking anybody, just contact booking at str.org and Darcy will talk with you and see what we can work out for any of our speakers. Okay, with that done, get your work aside. I don't want to spend a lot of time responding to the responses that we have gotten in volume regarding Amy's and my conversation of concern about what I just frankly labeled Jew hatred last week, and I still stand by the term. And we have a caller coming up from San Diego. We'll talk about that a little bit then, but I do want to say a few things about in response to all of these responses, which in many cases were really heated and angry. And Amy has made an interesting observation. You could do with anything you want with this, but there are a lot of countries in the world that are ignominious. In other words, they do nasty, bad things. Iran stands out, actually, because it's the chief sponsor of terrorism around the world. And it doesn't matter who the terrorism is committed against, whether it's against Gentiles or Jews, it's still terrorism. And I would imagine one would be concerned about that and would be vocal about that if they are given to being vocal about nations that they think are acting inappropriately. But for some reason, it seems like Israel, and I'm just making an observation, I'm not saying right or wrong or anything, it just, Israel is singled out from all the nations for criticism. And ironically, even the nation who has vocally for years promoted the goal, expressed their goal of genocide, that would be Iran, of all Jews, for example, that there's almost nothing said against that by the rank and file who seem to weigh in very aggressively against Israel. I'm not, again, not defending Israel. I'm just making an observation, which is a curiosity, and Amy has made that. Well, she brought that up earlier, and it's not just Iran, just, I mean, that happens to be a Muslim country involved in Muslim terrorism, but there's a lot of other countries who've done bad stuff. But the UN has more, has raised more formal objections against the nation of Israel than every other country in the world put together. Doesn't that strike anybody as a little bit imbalanced when you consider all the other countries? I mean, think of North Korea, for goodness sake. Anyway, that's just, it's just something to think about. But among the objections, probably the most frequent one that I saw was the objection about the nation of Israel now, is not the nation of Israel of promise of the Old Testament, or there was the criticism that this is what we were assuming. And part of the observation had to do with this godless nation now, which it may be. I'm not sure why that's relevant because the nation of Israel was godless for most of its 2,000 years before Christ. And this is why the prophets criticized them prolifically, every single prophet. The bulk of the Old Testament is criticism of the godless nation of Israel. Now, of course, they had a God, but their behavior was godless. And after the civil war that followed Solomon's reign, there was a split in the nation and Israel and the 10 tribes had the north, and Judah and Benjamin had the south. So you had then Israel and Judah as the way they were distinguished, and there was not a single good king for the next hundreds of years until finally God judged the northern kingdom with the Assyrian dispersion. And there were some good kings in the south, but eventually in 586, God judged them as well with the Babylonian captivity. Now, God judged those people for their godlessness. I don't understand why this point is made because as if Israel has been pristine for most of its existence up until the scattering in 70 AD, and so now that the Jews have a national presence in the Middle East, that somehow it's inappropriate to talk about them as if they're the people of God in the sense I described.

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

From Genesis chapter 12 and chapter 15, and the Abrahamic covenant confirmed there in 15 as those that would come forth from Abraham's own loin. I mean, how... Look, if God promised the nation of Israel would endure, and if someone objects to that or disagrees with that, they're welcome to do that. That's, I mean, there are various theological views. Then what they have to do, in my view at least, is to deal with the multitude of Old Testament promises that show God's unconditional faithfulness to the nation itself. I mentioned Genesis 12 and Genesis 15. That's the Abrahamic covenant. But I also read from Jeremiah 31, which announced a new covenant coming because the old covenant had been broken by who? By the Jews. And so God was instituting a new covenant. But when he does that, and you could read Jeremiah 31, 31 and following, it just seems to me the language there and the way it was supposed to be understood by the people who received it was a very, very aggressive statement of God's unconditional faithfulness to this ethnic people forever. Now, people can take exception with that, fine, but you've got to deal with the verse. You can't just dismiss it as, oh, that's dispensationalism. And this is what some critics who are responding, and that's fine, they respond, I have no objection to that. But some were just dismissive. Oh, that's dispensationalism, your dispensationalism. Well, that's my view, and I have biblical reasons for it. But it's not Amy's view. She's covenant. That's a whole different approach to this issue. But she also gave her own reasons, which we'll get to in a moment, of why this reaction or response or movement, whatever you want to call it, of anti-Semitism and what seems to me clearly Jew hatred, why that's unacceptable from God's perspective. All right, but in any event, I think that people who reject one of the points I was making, that Israel is no longer Israel now, he's going to have to answer the question of how the promise of God failed. Since, according to some, we can't determine now who those people are as a nation. Now, it strikes me, it's pretty obvious, and again, this is just going to the question of who are Jews, was there a continuity from Abraham to the present day so that we can identify a group of people that we could call Israel as a nation, not necessarily, and this isn't my view either when I use the term, not necessarily the Zionist group, but certainly including that and all the dispersed ones. They're still a nation, even if they don't all belong to the homeland right now, the homeland has been established for them. Now, it's just pretty obvious that this ethnic group has an unbroken chain going all the way back to the time of Jesus, since they have been the objects of persecution for that entire time. And that is, as a result, I'm convinced of God's discipline on them, according to the provisions of Deuteronomy 28 and 30. I read those provisions, or at least a portion of them, or made reference to them. And also, how is it that if that nation survived as a distinct people for 2,000 years from the time of Abraham to the time of Jesus, that they haven't been able to survive as a distinct people for 2,000 years from the time of Jesus until now? I mean, that's odd in light of all the objections that I have just read recently, that who are these people anyway? Are they the real Jews? Anyway, secondly, identifying the Jews as God's persistent people according to the most foundational covenant of the Bible, which is God's rescue plan for the world, the Abrahamic covenant, does not preclude criticism and or condemnation of Israel, current Israel, when appropriate. Now, this is a point that I made very directly last week. And it seems from the objections that I read, people simply didn't hear. So I'm just making it clear, and in fact, I underscored it last time, as I did just a few moments ago, with the observation that the prophets to a man criticized Israel for all their existence during biblical times. They were almost never good. There were brief seasons of revival, so to speak, and reform, but those were very brief. And then they fell back in their own ways. Look at just the time of the judges, back and forth and back and forth and back and forth and back and forth. This nation has never been faithful and has never been godly as a rule. So since the prophets criticized them when appropriate, then it seems to me that it's totally right for us to criticize any group of Jews when appropriate. Now, of course, there's lots of criticism I read about the nation of Israel. And just for myself, whether condemnation of the current nation of Israel is legitimate based on current political circumstances, I personally don't see it. That's my take. I'm not getting in a big argument with people about it. I'm just saying, what I see, I don't see that. What I see is a nation that's been fighting for their existence for 75 years and being attacked unprovoked and continually by foes and defeating them. And there's only one time they offered a preemptive attack, but that was because the enemy was setting up to take them out. I get the wars mixed up, the 67 war, the 73 war, then there's war. But nevertheless, it seems like they've been fighting for their existence. And this has been a defensive battle, not an offensive battle. And it does strike me too, Israel is certainly capable of genocide if that was their goal. And they could do it really quickly. But I have an observation here that you can just chew on with regards to the political question. And I'm not going to belabor this point, but I think Dennis Prager has done a good job in simplifying the issue. He's got a PragerU, a five-minute PragerU on this, but I'll just give you the 60-second version. He said, if Hamas and Hezbollah and the Palestinians and Iran and just add your group, the aggressive foes of Israel, if they were to lay down their arms, what would be the result? And what he says, and I think he's right, is the result would be peace. But what if the circumstances were flipped? What if it were the Jews that decided they would lay down their arms? What would happen? The result would be the annihilation of the nation. You know, well, what do you think from the river to the sea means? And this is a statement, by the way, that Iran has made public many, many times to wipe Israel off the map with nuclear weapons. So, I mean, that, I think, ought to tell us volumes when you think of that reality. And I think that is an accurate assessment about the balance, the moral compass element. This isn't to exonerate Israel from things that they've done wrong, not at all. And that's not my view. Like I said, they should be criticized, and any Jewish person should be criticized when they do something worth criticism. So, anyway, that's a political assessment. That last bit is not a theological one, and that's not the kind of thing I focus on on this show. But I do want to say something about Amy's comments, because there are a number of people who just dismissed my perspective as, that's dispensational, just for the record, that's genetic fallacy. You can't just call it a name and then just wave your hand, and it goes away. There are biblical reasons for people holding that view, and you have to deal with the reasons. You can't just dismiss. But Amy is not, doesn't hold that view. And she gave a brilliant commentary from Romans 9 through 12,

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

Regarding Paul's own attitude toward the Jews who were at that time apostate as a nation, there were godly people among them and they became Christians. Or maybe I should put it more accurately, they trusted Jesus as the Jewish Messiah. They didn't become something other. They didn't become a new religion. As Amy was explaining yesterday, the tree is Israel and its promises, in this case, the new covenant. And some of the branches are torn off and wild olive branches, that's the Gentiles, are grafted in, But it's still the root is still in a Jewish covenant called the new covenant. And anyway, as she went through her commentary, she reflected on Paul's own attitude towards the Jews, as I mentioned, who are an apostate nation and persecuting him brutally. I mean, how many times did he receive 39 lashes? Four times? How many times was he beaten with rods? Three times? I mean, and on and on it goes. But what was his attitude towards those who were enemies of the cross of Christ, enemies of God, enemies of Jesus as He was, his attitude was that he loved... I'd rather, he loved... I was thinking of Amy's point, the Jews. He mourned for his people. He prayed for their salvation. He wished he could trade his own salvation for theirs. And he reminded us that God has a future for the nation once the fullness of the Gentiles have come in and that there has always been, even so, a believing remnant of Jews in God's economy. And then he reminded us, and this is chapter 12, Amy mentioned this, that we are not to ever return evil for evil, but to leave room for the vengeance of God since He will repay. And I'll tell you what, God has had His vengeance on Israel as a nation, and I'm thinking that, you think of that term writ broad for thousands of years. Go back to Deuteronomy 28 through 30. It's all spelled out right there. He will repay. But I'll tell you what my deepest concern here is for the Jew hatred I see rising up. It's not for Israel. That's not my deepest concern. God can take care of that. My deepest concern is for the Jew hatred I see rising up in circles with people who claim to be Christian. And I have been stunned by it. This is a new discovery for me, but apparently it goes deep, especially... Have we ever gotten the kind of response, Amy, from a show? I don't think ever when I look at all of the things we got on Facebook, all the social media, and YouTube, where you showed me that just a few moments ago. Holy smokes! My concern is for them because there's no excuse, nor justification before God for the attitude, the anger, the hostility, the... I'm straining out for superlatives here, the Jew hatred, maybe simply put. And I won't even go into the attempted rehabilitation of Hitler and the Third Reich that's happening at some quarters. Boy, I hope there's no Christians involved in that. No real... Nobody who claims to be. Regarding their grotesque history with the Jewish people, and not just the Jews, but that's kind of the focus of Holocaust deniers, etc. That is so far beyond the pale that, frankly, it disgusts me to even countenance such an idea because I know too much. I mentioned last week, I've been to two concentration camps. I've read books and books and books on these things. I've spent time in the home with having a meal with people who survived Auschwitz. Sonderkommando. Look it up. That is so far beyond the pale. I know too much for that period of time, so should everyone else, but unfortunately, human beings have a short memory, but God does not, and He will not forget this unconscionable attack on His people. So, that's my response. And we're going to move on, except we will have a call in just a minute. Let's take a break. I'm Greg Kokel for Stand to Reason. Friends, if you like this broadcast, I know you'll love Hashtag STR Ask. It's our shorter 20-minute podcast where I am paired with the wonderful Amy Hall, and together we answer the questions you send us on Twitter. Hashtag STR Ask is released twice a week, Mondays and Thursdays, and it's only about 20 minutes long, so it's perfect to listen to on your morning jog or while driving around running errands or cleaning your garage or just plain loafing at home. Amy and I tackle your questions on theology and ethics and culture and lots more, offering our insight on the questions you're asking or the challenges you face. You can listen on Apple podcasts or wherever you download your own shows. Just remember, send us your questions on Twitter using the name of the podcast, Hashtag STR Ask. That's Hashtag STR Ask. Have you ever wondered how Stand to Reason is able to produce fresh, accessible content each week? We rely on generous donors so that we can provide you with the tools and tactics you need to be an effective ambassador for Christ. If you've benefited from this podcast or any of our donor-provided resources, including our apps, blog posts, articles, and short videos, consider making a financial contribution to Stand to Reason today. Just visit str.org slash donate to show your financial support. It has been an honor providing you with a host of free resources for more than 27 years to help you give voice to the Christian worldview. Help us continue by making a financial gift today at str.org slash donate. Alrighty. Okay, here we go. Let's talk with James in San Diego. And James, I just want you to know I'm glad you called. Hi, Greg. Thanks for taking my call. Yeah, you're welcome. So I have four issues that I wanted to bring up, but I first wanted to offer a response to your observation of the focus on Israel and kind of this dismissal or ignoring the surrounding countries that are doing things, if not the same, worse than Israel. So I wanted to give you... By the way, do you think that's a true statement? What is a true statement? That there are other countries that are doing worse than Israel in many cases. Yes. Okay. I wasn't going to argue with you yes or no. I just wanted to see what you thought. Yeah. Okay. I believe there are. I just want to explain why there seems to be a focus on Israel and not so much a focus on the rest of the Muslim countries. So from my perspective, for instance, me, over the past year, I've been focused heavily on Israel. And the reason why is because I come from a dispensationalist background. I was raised in dispensationalism. I grew up watching all the Left Behind series movies. All the churches in San Diego, pretty much I'd say 90% of them are dispensationalists. So that's my background. And I've been on this kind of like this truth-seeking endeavor for about a little over a year now. So along the way, though, in my upbringing, I was always brought up with the understanding that the conflicts in the Middle East are a battle of good versus evil. Israel's the good guys. The Muslims, you know, they're all the bad guys. And we're reminded of it from highlights of terrorist attacks, suicide bombings, 9-11, you name it. They're the bad guys. Israel's defending us. They're defending Western civilization. They're the good guys. So that's been the picture that's been painted to someone like me for my entire life. Okay. Then recently, when I started going down my own path of truth-seeking, and I started finding out the history of Israel, the history of Palestine, etc., etc., a different picture emerges. And so then what ends up happening is you eventually get to a point where I'm at today, which is, the struggle over there is not good versus evil, it's evil versus evil. And so since a lot of people have still been shaped by that framing, that moral framing of it's a battle of good versus evil, for me, I see it as a duty as a follower of Christ, that there's a duty, that there's a deception out there that is still painting the...

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

the secular, godless nation of Israel that is formed, it was formed politically, and is operating politically. It's not operating as a theocracy the way the old nation was. OK, so again, I don't want this to be the focus of my call. I'm just trying to give you a quick answer of why someone like me or other Christians like me or anyone for that matter, may be focused so much on highlighting what Israel is doing in Gaza and in southern Lebanon and why they're not calling out Iran or calling out, you know, all the other countries and terrorist organizations. OK, quick point of clarity then on this one. Amy's, in my observation, is not just about evangelical Christians who were once dispensationalists and now have a different view, and so now they're kind of trying to react and bring, you know, what seem to be the facts to light about the liabilities that Israel brings to the table, as it were, moral liabilities, which they weren't willing to see before. Our observation was much broader than that, and that's why I mentioned about the UN. The UN has more injunctions against the nation of Israel than every other nation combined. And so it's not just you. That might explain your own thing, but our question was about the broader issue. So just to make that clear. But I appreciate you clarifying your own view on that. So you had some other points, though? Yeah, so number one, you know, I listened to the last two podcasts with you and Amy. I appreciate you guys discussing the topic. But there were a couple things that kind of stood out to me. Number one, you guys focused on the issue of anti-Semitism, but it was framed in moral terms, but ignored the ontology of anti-Semitism. So you focused on how bad it is, but you presupposed a shared definition that simply doesn't exist in the real world. Okay, so just to be clear, do you mean etymology or do you mean ontology? Those are different words. Etymology has to do with the history. I'm talking about ontology with an L. That's the nature of a thing's existence. Right, the nature of anti-Semitism. Okay, so, well, all right, what we're focusing on is an observed behavior of hostility towards Jews as Jews that has a long history, okay? And so I don't think we're using the word in a very clever or novel fashion. And are you taking exception with that? Well, in, you know, classic Colombo form, I'll ask you, what do you mean by anti-Semitism? Against Jews. And I characterize it as simply Jew hatred. So I don't think we were unclear about the things that we were talking about. People who are opposing Jews as Jews, just like black racism in the 60s, for example, was when people were opposing blacks because they were black. And they were also interfering with their liberties and rights and stuff like that. So it was an opposition to a group of people based on a certain ethnic quality. And in this case, this is the same thing that I see going on, the same thing that the Third Reich was guilty of, an opposition to a group of people based on their ethnic quality. And they were anti these people, and they were Semites, and that's why we call it anti-Semitism to make it more strong in terms of moral terms. I call it Jew hatred. Right, and so that's the dictionary definition, the classic definition that I don't think is debatable. But the ontology in practice today, the one that I think, well, number one, that the State Department, you can look this one up. The State Department uses this definition, and it's stretched so silly. It's basically silly putty at this point where now Jews are being accused of anti-Semitism. You know, so it's changed from hating a people to critiquing the actions and the content of character of individuals or a state. Then it's just applying the wrong category to people that are just critical of Israel or critical of Jews. Well, that isn't the way I'm using it, and we're talking about, and I actually don't, hold on just a second. I'm sorry. I don't know that that's principally the thing we're concerned with, okay? I just explained the way we're using the term, and I'm sympathetic to, I mean, let's take fascist and Nazi. I mean, these are two terms that have been so twisted and distorted that they only have rhetorical force now. They have no substantive meaning the way people are using them. And it may be that anti-Semitism is creeping into that category. I don't think that's the case because I don't think there's anything Nazi-ic or fascistic about the things that people are using those words to describe. What I do think there is clearly examples of anti-Semitism in things that people are now describing as anti-Semitism. So I'm just trying to be clear how we are using the words, okay? Right. And I think we are describing something that's real, and this is especially obvious to me after I've seen all the responses. Yes, but I'm speaking from experience from the outset. So just to give you a clearer picture, almost all my friends and family, with the exception of a couple, are still dispensationalists. And when I try to talk to them about issues of Israel or anything Jewish related, they look at me like I'm crazy. They're starting to look at me like I'm a Nazi. So the reason I'm telling you this is I'm telling you from experience of having been in these circles. Where'd you go? Hello, James. I lost your volume. I don't know. Did you hit a mute button or something by accident? I did not touch a thing. Okay. Well, let me respond to what you've said so far. I'm not sure that all of that observation is relevant to our concern here. What you're saying is, this is how my family reacts to me because they're deeply committed to dispensational theology. Okay. And incidentally, for those who may not be familiar with the term, the chief distinctive of dispensational theology compared to other aspects of theology related to this broader issue is that Israel remains distinct in God's program as a nation and that God has a long-term plan for the national Israel and promises that God made to national Israel in the Old Testament still apply to Israel today, even though they're apostate, like they pretty much have been their entire existence. So that's what we mean by that. And it does not mean to somehow confuse people about the nature of the church because in the church, under the new covenant, there is neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, nor male nor female. Okay. But having said that, there are things that God has to say about men and women, in particular in the church, and behaviors and things that we're responsible for, and slaves and masters and how they're to behave. So those distinctions or lack of theological distinctions within the church in terms of value on the, you know, at the foot of the cross does not suggest that there are no distinctions with regards to national Israel. It's a different kind of discussion. But I'm just clarifying the terms right now. I'm not trying to argue for them. Are you still with me, James? Yeah, can you hear me? Yeah, I can now. We lost you for a bit, but I just kept talking. Okay, sorry about that. But what I did say was I think the circumstance with your family is maybe unique to your family or to others who are dispensationalists. And I'm not sure. That may be a bummer for you, but I don't know how that relates to the broader issue. And maybe you want to move on to some of your other points because I know you have more. Yeah, that's fine. The only reason I brought that up is because I want to clarify to you that I don't have any hatred in me. There's no hatred in me whatsoever. I'm a follower of Jesus Christ, and I love all people made in the image of God. I believe that applies to everyone. I take you at your word on this, too. So you're not going to get a fight from me. And I'm not inferring Jew hatred simply from opposition to Israel. However, I do think there is a significant, just observing, I'm just watching and listening, and what I'm hearing, and this seems to be a term that applied to many people who are hostile to Israel. And thankfully, it doesn't apply to you. So I'm with you on that. Okay, so this can kind of lead into my second point, because this, the second point here that I want to address, it can be interpreted as hateful, and that's the logic of pattern recognition. So what I mean by this is, there should be a difference between noticing a

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

that's logic, from hating a group and that's sin. So I…I can agree with that. I mean, I think blacks have a real problem in this country. I think it's cultural, not racial. And it's things that have happened in their life, and the, you know, the ADC that came out of the 60s, Aid to Dependent Children, this hurt them badly, you know, hurt their families. And so there are problems there with them, but it's not because of their race. It's because of the culture that they've grown up in. So I can see, I…I see…I think that's the distinction you're talking about, and I can acknowledge that, okay? The question is whether the patterns are…are racially consistent. In other words, if we do see a pattern, a demonstrable pattern, as a matter of fact, with Jews around the world doing certain things that are ignominious, or maybe the nation of Israel, that's a question of fact. Right, and so in—in terms, in our modern terms and society, if you were to bring up crime statistics that… Oh, we just lost you again. I'm sorry. I don't know what's going on again. I didn't… Oh, now we're… Yeah, I got you now. Right. Crime statistics, like black-on-black violence, for example. This will be… Right. …good on black people. That's…those are the numbers. It doesn't matter who says them. I got you there. Right, and that'll be considered racist, and so what's happening right now, the big thing that's happening right now is not Jew hatred. The big thing right now in these circles that are…the term is noticing, okay? Is the what? I'm sorry. Noticing, with an N. Okay, thanks, but people are noticing things, trends within the Jewish population, I'm presuming. And again, we lost you. This is really hard. Well, it gives me an opportunity to talk. Okay, yeah. Do you know what's going on there? It could just be a bit of a weird location. I can try to go outside, maybe. Okay, all right. But otherwise, you're really clear when you come through. It's great. All right, so this second point I'm still…okay, I understand the patterns you're talking about. I think that's a matter of factual assessment. Right, so what's going on right now is you have people that are recognizing patterns of Jewish individuals and groups in a overrepresented positions of power. And so they're highlighting it. They're pointing it out. And they're saying, hey, do you notice this? And other people are saying, yeah, I noticed this. And what is now happening is more podcasters, such as Candace Owens, Tucker Carlson, Nick Fuentes, Dan Bilzerian, they're pointing these things out. And then in doing so, now they're being labeled anti-Semitic. Mm-hmm. Okay, so like what…Israel just came out with like a top 10 anti-Semites. And on the list, you know, you…you guys brought up Michael's…I forget his last name, Michael Spielberg or…what was his last name, Spangler? Yeah, Michael Spangler. Yeah, and what he wrote about Corrie Ten Boom. Right, and I looked him up. I never heard of him. He's got like 5,000 followers. Yeah, 5,000 followers. But these other people, like Candace Owens, Tucker Carlson, Nick Fuentes, these people have tens of millions of followers. No, I understand that. These are… Right, so this is really what the issue of, quote, anti-Semitism is. But when you listen to them, which I have, when you listen to them, they're not preaching Jew hatred. They're…they're pointing to things. They're noticing things, pointing it out. Okay, what I'm going to do is I get your point, and you have more, and we have another caller on that's waiting. But I get your point. I'm not going to take exception with it. I'm just accepting your explanation of the circumstance. There's probably a lot I could say about it. I haven't done a deep dive into these individuals. But…so I'm just going to say, okay, I understand the point you're making with that. Okay, let me…I'll let you get to the other caller because this is a...a long topic, and I'd love to continue it maybe next week or in another call, if we could. What was the...you had...let me just deal with one other thing that you have mentioned, and that...I mean, Amy wrote it down for me. And it's something about Galatians 6:10, which I read, and I don't understand how it relates to anything we're discussing here unless what you're saying is we should be taking care of our own and not worrying about what bad things people are saying about Jews. Sure. I'll just...I'll take 30 seconds to explain it, and you can either address it later and take your time on the issue to really understand it. So what it is, it's the concept of priority of the household, okay? So Got Questions did a great article on this. Your listeners can look it up. It's called Household of Faith, Galatians 6:10. And they're clarifying this issue, and I'll let you explain to your audience what it is. I don't need to do that. But the...the conflict that I'm looking at is that if we apply that, okay, we're in a...someone like you, who is a Christian Zionist, they are in an awkward position when you...when you contrast Galatians 6:10 and the concept of priority of the household with Genesis 12:3, specifically when it comes to Palestinian Christians. All right, I guess I did see a note about that that Amy wrote. And I…I actually do not see the connection. I don't care whether they're Palestinian or whatever. We should be caring about anybody anywhere that loves the Lord and seeking...seeking their well-being, okay? Now, I...you know, look, I spent five and a half weeks behind the Iron Curtain in 1976 working with Christians that were being persecuted. I had a season in my life where I was able to do that. It was undercover. There was some danger involved, but we got out okay, all right? And that's the household of faith. Those were Russians. Those were Ukrainians. Those were...let's see, what…Poles. They were Germans. They were people that were suffering. They're Romanians. They're Hungarians. I mean, Yugoslavians. I was all in all of these countries, okay? So I can agree with what you're saying without at the same time, and even with regards to Palestinians. But it seems to me that in making this point, there's a...there's a political package that's coming in there because this is making assumptions about maybe Palestinians' right to a homeland or something like that or whatever. I'm not sure exactly how it ties to this at all. I agree with Galatians 6:10, and my biggest concern is for the body of Christ. And that's what I expressed even in my comments earlier today. I mean, just now. My biggest concern is what seems to be happening within the body. And so again, I don't see how anything that I am concerned about or talked about in any way undermines Galatians 6:10 just because there are Palestinians who are Christians. There are Jews who are Christians, too. So I'm not sure how that...Can you give me 60 seconds and connect those dots for me? Sure. The reason why is because... What is the narrative that's been fed to us is that Israel is just a small country surrounded by hostile neighbors wanting to destroy it. But when you look into the details, what has been happening recently is Israel is expanding its borders, okay? It's been...it's been expansionist. And in these expansions, what they do is they...they will take land from Palestinian Christians, okay? So Jonathan Cook, he's a journalist who lived in Nazareth for 20 years. And he wrote an article about six years ago called The Slow Exodus of Palestinian Christians. It's a long article, but it's worth reading because it addresses this issue. So I encourage you and your listeners to look that article up. Okay, fair enough. Just one last comment and just a question, and not to go into detail here because I want to get to Christian in Missouri. And that is, did Israel give away the entire Gaza Strip? Did...give it away? Yes. Well, I know in 2005, they withdrew for a period of time, and that's, you know, when Hamas was elected, and they kind of blew up. But is that what you're referring to? Yeah, okay. Well, that was their land, and they gave that away to those people, the people there. I'm not sure exactly how to characterize them, you know, in terms of ethnically, but I'll just say maybe Palestinians or whatever. And they elected Hamas. Okay, I'm just…just a point of information. James, thank you for calling. I'm actually going to be gone for like the next six weeks. I have one more week, and we got shows coming, but I won't be able to take...I'll be here next week, but I won't be able to...other than that, I won't be able to take a lot of other calls. So maybe if you want to call then, we'll pick this conversation up then. But I do appreciate the things that you said and your perspective. All right? Thank you, Greg. I really appreciate it. God bless. All the best. Thank you. Gotta get to, and finally, to Christian

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

...and maybe a different topic, I don't know. Christian, welcome to the show. Hey, Greg. Appreciate it. Can you hear me well? Because I'm in my parking lot at the moment. All right. I can hear you fine. OK. Awesome. Yeah, I was totally planning on going a different direction because I don't pay a lot of attention to what's going on overseas. I care more about what's at home. But my question has to do more with the fundamentals of Christianity, more specifically when it comes to the criminal justice system. And this is something that I would usually do a lot of looking into on my own, maybe looking into my Reformed study Bible, getting some commentary on it from my pastor. But I didn't think of it until just today, and I got my alert that you were live, so I was like, I'm going to call Greg on this. All right. So thanks. I appreciate you for taking the call. With the criminal justice system that we have here in America, we don't accept penal substitutes. I'm sorry. You missed the last line. We don't expect—what was that? We don't accept penal substitutes to satisfy the— Oh, yeah, yeah, right. Characteristically, no. I mean, things like parking tickets and that, there's no problem there. But I understand what you mean. OK. Right. If I murder somebody, my brother can't take the death penalty for me, and then I walk free. Yeah. As far as I can tell, Bill Craig has a lot to say about this in his book on the atonement. There is more latitude, I think, than some people believe. But I'm with you on this. I'm not going to fight you on that point. OK, but do you think that that—are you trying to apply that to the atonement of Jesus? I'm not trying to apply it to the atonement of Jesus. I'm trying to ask, if I believe that the American criminal justice system is founded the way that it should be, which is that if you commit a crime, you are the one who pays for it. If that's the way that it's ought to be, and I think you would agree, then why is it that God—and I'm not using this as a means to say that God is in the wrong here. I'm trying to understand, why is it that God allowed that to satisfy our sins, His wrath for our sins, but we don't do the same in our justice system? Well, I think the answer is—and this may not be satisfying to you, but the answer is this is the way that justice can be served and mercy can be shown. And if that isn't the way, then there is no way. There is only justice. And I've made the comment before that the calculus is either Jesus pays or we pay. Now, if you remove Jesus pays from the calculus, only we pay remains. So there is no possibility for mercy for us, only justice. The key here is—and you mentioned this right at the beginning of your comments on this issue—you said, In our government, our government will not take in exchange a substitute. And I agree with that, largely. But that's not true in God's government. And the thing that matters is who's governing. If the one governing, that is the one who is offended—let me back up for a little bit because—do you mind if I ask you how old you are? I'm 27. Okay, that's nothing wrong with that. But an era before you, there was a way of talking about punishment as paying one's debt to society, okay? So you committed a crime, you owe the government for the crime you committed, and then you do your time and pay the debt that you owe the government until you're done and then you paid it off, so to speak. It was the language. Well, the same concept is in play here with God. And in this case, we owe a debt to God, perfect obedience, but we don't fulfill that. So we're guilty. And that's what the books are open in Genesis 20. Now, what does that government, God's government, the sovereign, what does he think about the idea of a substitute? And his idea is, I will be the substitute in order to provide mercy instead of justice as an act of love. I will be the substitute. And if the sovereign who is wronged, to whom we owe a debt, is willing to take a substitute to pay the debt, and he himself is the substitute so that he can provide mercy rather than judgment, what is the basis of one's complaint about that? Does that make more sense to you? That's a genius way to think about it, because that's something I had not considered. I guess my question would be, so then should we also have the same perspective? In our government? Yeah. No, because God's purpose for our government is the punishment of evildoers and the praise of those who do good. His expectation of us, as our sovereign, the way he has told us to exercise justice within our communities is that bad people get punished. Now, they're temporally punished. They're not eternally punished. That's in human courts, not in God's court. God, in God's court, he offers an alternative that he is happy to offer and accept a substitute for, which is himself. And as long as he's happy to offer that, then, I mean, this is an opportunity for guilty people to be forgiven. That's a good thing, not a bad thing. And incidentally, it sounded like you said a moment ago, well, this is kind of a new thought to me. I'll have to work on that. Maybe, and that's OK. But it is not a new biblical concept. It is the foundation, I think, of he made him who knew no sin to be sin on our behalf that we might become the righteousness of God in him. That's 2 Corinthians 5. So there's a few things to think about there that might help you. And I'm just out of time here. My music's coming up in 10 seconds. But you may want to come back and we can talk about this more. It's a very important concept. And I did write a piece that's available on our website called Why the Blood. Why the Blood. And it's about substitutionary atonement. So I hope this helps a little bit, Christian, and gets you thinking a little bit in a new way, but I think in a more biblical way, about how God has offered mercy to us through Christ. Thank you for the call. Gotta go, friends. Greg Kokel here for Stand to Reason. Give them heaven, all right? Bye-bye now.
