# An April Fools’ Day Story

- Publication date: 2026-04-03
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/f5831c44-0beb-350d-a879-6cc126f70b10`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

All right, friends. Hey, welcome to the show, and I want to encourage people in one of these nine states to consider seriously opening up an outpost. You know, outposts are, they're gatherings of Christians of kindred spirit and like minds that want to encourage each other, especially in the kinds of things that we talk about, OK? They're local communities of Christians seeking answers to the hard questions of classical Christianity. Maybe they know some of them. They're trying to sharpen their tools, so to speak, help other Christians, or even that group be an aid to the local church where these outposts are at. We have, what do we have, 177 outposts now. They're in 12 different countries and 40 different states. Let me do the math here. 9, 49, must be 41, OK, because I'm looking at my lists here and I just got the list from Tripp. We got nine states that don't have an outpost. That means that's virgin territory. You could be the first person in Alaska or in Hawaii or Wyoming or North Dakota. By the way, those are all up there in cowboy country. Well, not Hawaii. Well, I guess so. They got cowboys there too. Alaska, well, well, Kansas or Mississippi or Vermont or Rhode Island or Massachusetts. No outposts in either of those states. So I want to challenge you to think about being the first outpost in one of those states. And of course, if you're in other states that have outposts, plenty of room for you guys. No worries. And we have 12 different countries that have outposts in them as well. So if you want to get more information, go to str.org slash outposts and you can learn more about it. You'll see on the map there where all of the ones that we have, 177 of them are, and you can think about, well, maybe you'll open one up in your own community. The more, the better because this expands the influence of Stand to Reason. It gives you a chance if you're an outpost leader and you've got to jump through some hoops in order to qualify, but it allows you to be part of a discipleship enterprise and be mentored yourself by Tripp Allman, who is the overseer and head and chief discipler for outposts. He's doing a fabulous, fabulous job. So I, I just want to encourage you on that. A couple other announcements that, um, you know, reality is coming up. We've got three weeks from Friday. So this, this broadcast is going out Friday this week. So three weeks, that's April 24 and 25th. Right now on Tuesday, we have 1300 signed up. This is a Calvary Chapel, um, Downey. They hold 3000 people. We're pushing close to half full. And we have, um, three weeks to go and there's incentives for people to sign up in the next few weeks. So, um, we're expecting a lot more. I hope you can go. This is the very last reality, as far as we know, that J. Warner Wallace will be part of. We are sad to see him go, but feel very honored that we had him part of our team for all of these years. And, uh, of course, there's not just J. Warner, Tim Barnett, Alan Schleman, John Noyes, um, uh, who else is on board? The Allmans, obviously. Um, John Stone Street is one of our chief speakers. I'll be on the main stage on Friday night. That's unusual for me. Jason Jimenez will be back again. He's become a feature for us as well. It is fabulous. I've been to five so far this year or this season, I should say. Um, please go to realityapologetics.com and sign up for the LA reality coming up in three weeks, April 24th and 25th. Be there or you'll be sorry. All right. I almost said be there or be square, but nobody knows what that means anymore. So, um, one other thing, I got a caller on board and I will get to her in just a moment. One other thing I want to mention, I'm a day late in mentioning this. I should have mentioned it at the earlier show, an hour ago, but I didn't. I just realized tomorrow for me now is April 1st, which is April Fool's Day. So when the team mentioned this just in the break, I said, don't anybody mess with me because I'm not a fan of April Fool's jokes and I don't get spoofed very often, although Brett Conkle got me once, but it wasn't April Fool's, I don't think. And believe it or not, many of you still remember the enforcer, Melinda Petter, who was the co-founder of Stand to Reason in 1993 and was with us for 25 years before her accident. And now she's with the Lord, but she, she was the last person I ever expected to be spoofed by. And she got me dead rights. So I'm going to tell you, this is the best one because the aftermath was so good. Now, some of you know who Hugh Hewitt is. He works for, he's a broadcaster with the Salem Radio. I did a three-hour debate with, with Michael Shermer, the American atheist, on his program, his national program. And Amy was actually with me for that. I remember so well. She came as moral support and encouragement. And I was going over my notes in the parking lot outside of the studios. And do you remember Amy? It was pouring rain. It was like cats and dogs. It was unbelievable. Okay. And I took a deep breath and went in. So that was Hugh Hewitt's program. So I've, I'd known Hugh for many years, haven't interacted with him for quite a while. But, um, he's a significant player and has got a very popular show. And there had been some discussion about me hosting his show when he's out of town sometime. And, and other Salem hosts had arranged that with me in the past. And so, but this was a big national show, not like the KKLA, um, show here in the Los Angeles footprint. And so, you know, it's just in the back of my head and I told Melinda, I'll do it. I'm going to help if he wants me to do it, but I can't know this last minute. I got to plan ahead. I got a whole week to kind of put a show together and make sure that I got every syllable covered for the whole three hours of that amazing show. And so that's just kind of in the back of my mind. Maybe he'll call sometime and set it up, but if he does, be sure to give me plenty of time. So on April 1st, and I don't even think I was thinking that it was April 1st, but um, my wife and I went to breakfast at this place in South Bay, Redondo Beach that we like a lot. It's not there anymore, but it was a place for special times. We'd go and we were just kind of relaxing and enjoying ourselves. I was taking an easy day and had this wonderful breakfast. And as we're driving by back, I get a call from Melinda. Now Hugh's program came on at three in the afternoon, LA time. And Melinda called me, called me and says, Um, Hugh Hewitt's producer just called us. They need you in the show. He had an emergency. He's pulled out. You're doing a show today. And I am telling you, my BP, blood pressure, went right through the roof. I said, Melinda, Melinda, I told you I can't do this on one moment's notice. I got to prepare for this. I got to get it together. I got to take care of this. Well, that's what we got. I'm sorry. This is a great opportunity. We can't pass it up. Now, of course, my attitude is I'm going to step up and these kinds of things have happened before. We're just gonna just do it. Right. All right. And now I'm speeding home because I got to get back to my house and I'm going to get to work so I can be at the studio in Orange County, which is an hour away from where I lived, and have a show in hand so I could do three hours of national broadcast on Hugh Hewitt's show. And I'm telling you, I was freaked out. And then about 10 minutes later, Melinda called back. I picked up the phone and she said, April Fool's. And guess what? I wasn't mad. I'm even feeling it right now. The sense of relief was so enormous. It was like the weight of the world had been taken off of my shoulders. I felt like I was on vacation. No, it was better than that because even when I'm on vacation, I don't feel that good. It was just fabulous. So she got me and did a very clever job. Now, I don't prank people because my view, my view is this doesn't sound very fun. I know some people are really into it, but my view is, and it's just my view, I'm just saying, pranking trades on betrayal of trust and it really works well when you have betrayed somebody's trust really well.

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

Now guys do that, and I told you Brett Kunkel did that. You know, president and founder and president of MAVEN. He's worked for us for, what, 15 years. But he got me, and it was a total of different thing. And it was funny. And nevertheless, he had more fun with it than I did, but nevertheless. So I'm not into pranks. I don't want to be looking over my shoulder, whatever. But I do have to say, I've got to tip my hat to Melinda Penner, because hers was the best prank. It was so elegant, and it was especially good because I was particularly wound up about this issue. She wound me up like a top, and then she let it sit there for about 10 minutes before she called me back and then relieved the pressure. And it was like nirvana. It was great. Anyway, so there's my April 1st April Fool's story. And don't anybody prank me on April Fools. You can never beat Melinda anyway. So she's done the best. You can't match her. Incidentally, this is how there is another April 1st joke. It had to do with Tim Barnett. And many of you know Tim. He's on our team. Mr. B. He's got an incredible following, by the way, on Red Pen Logic, which is a magnificent idea. If you haven't seen it yet, I'm not going to explain it to you. Just go to YouTube, type in Red Pen Logic, and hit the button. And just watch one of the five to seven-minute pieces that he puts together. He's very good. And it's lots of fun, and you'll learn a lot. But I think Tim's been working for us about 13 years. And it was right when we started what was then called Rethink, that became Reality. And Brett Kunkle had put that together. And Tim was an apologist who was a school teacher in Toronto, Canada, who had his own little organization called Clear Thinking Christianity, which is a ripoff of a moniker for the whole radio show that I did because he was a big fan of STR. And he was a fan of, you know, the stuff that we did in the radio show. And so he was doing his thing there in Canada on the side called Clear Thinking Christianity. And he had done an event with Sean McDowell in Canada, and Sean was encouraging him. And Sean told Brett Kunkle on our team that he met this guy in Canada that was pretty good. And maybe we'd like to use him for something like Rethink, which is now called Reality. And it was right in its early days. We only had 1,000 people at the second event, maybe 600 or 700 at the first, 1,000 at the second. But the 1,000 maxed out that particular church in Orange County, and that's why we had to go to Calvary Chapel, Costa Mesa, and move our event there. And we quickly filled that up, too, in subsequent years. But what was interesting is that Brett, who didn't know Tim, got Tim's phone number from Sean McDowell, and Brett called Tim Barnett to invite him to be a featured speaker at the Rethink. And he called him on April 1st. Now Brett wasn't thinking about anything. He didn't look at the calendar. But here's this guy who's doing Clear Thinking Christianity, who just happens to meet Sean McDowell, and he's doing his own little thing there in Ontario. And he's a big fan of Stand to Reason. And he's kind of Google-eyed about all of us guys doing our thing for Stand to Reason. And then somebody calls him who identifies himself as Brett Kunkle, and he's inviting him to come down to the States, down to America, south of the border, and be a speaker at Brett Kunkle's event called Rethink on April 1st. And he thought it was a joke. Oh, this is a spoof. You're not really Brett Kunkle. Oh, well, of course, it was Brett, and he did come down. And I sat in the very front row, and Tim did a fabulous job. I was there with my daughter, Annabeth, and she was, I don't know, about 12 or maybe 10, or maybe, I don't know what she was. She's 21 now, so I guess she was about 10. Yeah. And Tim had all kinds of trouble with his clicker and the screen and everything, but he did a fabulous job. And I got together with my team while we were still on campus. I said, we've got to hire this guy. I don't know how we're going to do it. I don't know how to get him to work for us when he lives in Canada. I don't know, but we got to hire this guy. And actually, Belinda worked out the details. It was not easy because California is not an easy state to work in. But nevertheless, it all worked out, and that's how we got Tim on board. But that's, there's another, what, April Fool's drama. I'll just pass it on, though now April Fool's has passed as you're listening to this. But okay, let's go to Allison in Indiana. And Allison, you've been very gracious to wait while I did all that April Fool's nonsense. So I'm glad to talk with you. Hi, Mr. Craig. Hope you're doing well. Thank you for taking my question. So a few months ago, you answered a question about whether Christians should attend a gay wedding. You mentioned that the kind of Christianity represented by going in that situation may not actually point or attract people towards what you see as true Christianity. So I was wondering how you would apply that same reasoning to the issue of preferred names and pronouns for transgender individuals. For example, if someone born male asked to be called by a female name and use she-her pronouns, how should a Christian respond? Because I've generally tried to be respectful by using a person's preferred name while avoiding pronouns that don't align with reality. But after hearing your earlier answer, I started wondering whether even using a preferred name that reflects something I don't believe to be true is actually helpful from a Christian perspective. Yeah, okay, this is a great question, very practical. And I think there is a fairly easy way to answer it, but it doesn't mean that it's going to be easy to practice. Like a lot of things, sometimes the right answer can be arrived at fairly quickly, but putting into play with people whose feelings are very sensitized, and this is an issue where that's the case, that's another issue entirely, okay? So let me give you the principle. We are agreed at Stand to Reason on the issue that you first brought up that Christians should not celebrate weddings between people who are of the same sex. Weddings are celebrations. We cannot celebrate something that's wrong, and this is why we say don't go to a same-sex wedding. Now, we do offer some ways of building relationship with those people who did get married, as it were, and we're not suggesting cutting people off, cutting off the relationship, but there's a way that you can manage this, okay? And we offer that. Now, when it comes to preferred names and preferred pronouns, I think there's a significant difference between names and pronouns. And the difference is that names are conventional. In other words, people make up names all the time. They are just mere things that we use to identify, and characteristically, certain names go with certain sexes, like Sue. My sister's name is Sue, all right? Well, boys aren't named Sue. I mean, Johnny Cash had a song about that many years ago, The Boy Named Sue. But, you know, as farcical a song, boys aren't named Sue. But nevertheless, the names themselves are not tied. They're just conventions. They're, in a sense, cultural practices. And there are names that travel. So, who was I? Like Pat. Pat travels, male or female. It could be a Pat. Charlie could be a woman. Charlie's the throne. Charlie is, I guess, but even they call her Charlie, I'm sure. And there are a lot of names like that that go either way. And so, since names are, by their nature, malleable, we have a different understanding or a different attitude or policy approach to using names than we do to pronouns. When you read in the Scripture, there are all kinds of screwy names. You can read a whole list of names. You can't tell whether it's a guy or a girl that they're talking about here. So, names are conventions. And people get to choose whatever name they want to go by. My son's name, my stepson, my wife's son, his name is Justin Melberg, but he doesn't go by Justin. He goes by his middle name, Dane. I have no idea why, but nevertheless, he goes by that. We have one of our board members goes by Kirby. Well, that's not his name. His name is William or Bill. But people used to call him Kirby when he was in college, and so he just goes by Kirby now. So these are names. Names are conventions, and they're flexible, and people can choose whatever name they want. This is our view. We're not going to fuss about names for the reasons I just mentioned. When it comes to pronouns, that's an entirely different story. And by the way, if it turns out that you won't use the name that somebody chooses for themselves...

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

because you fancy, well, that's a girl's name and that's a boy, or that's a boy's name and that's a girl. That raises a practical question. What name are you going to use of them? You're going to make your own name up? You know, especially if you don't know the name that they used before they made the transition, now what? You've got a practical problem. And if it turns out that you choose not to use their name, but you're fussing with them about this, it's hard to see how this can come across as any way but mean-spirited. It's just feels nasty. And so since there doesn't see an upside at all to this, there's no real requirement to go with names that, because names are conventions and a lot of names travel and some don't, but that's all right if people want to be called, if a gal wants to be called Fred, I mean, that's their choice, it seems to me. Genders aren't things you choose. You don't choose your gender, because gender is a function of sex and sex isn't chosen. It comes with the package, you know? It's a boy. It's a girl. That's what the doctor says, you know? You're not assigned your sex at birth. It comes with the package, right? And there are only two choices, boy or girl. So since gender slash sex is not flexible by nature, and it is tied to something that God made a particular way, and since God himself, and we see reflections in the law here, wants us to keep a distinction between the sexes and not have the distinctions be ambiguous, we counsel people not to use preferred pronouns, not to do that. And we think that's a compromise. Now, there are Christians who have thought this is the right way to go. And incidentally, I know that can sound mean-spirited to some people, too. I'll come back to that in a moment, okay, Allison? But we've had...oh my goodness...Amy. The girl's name I always mispronounce. Rosario Butterfield. Rosario Butterfield. Sorry, Rosie. I call her Rosie the Riveter now. But so Rosario Butterfield is a very outspoken Christian who had been deeply invested in a lesbian lifestyle. Now she's married and has children. And she had favored using preferred pronouns in the past, and now she's dead set against it, and she thinks it's a compromise of her convictions before God to make life easier for us so that people aren't going to be mad at us. And I think that she's got a point. I do not... I am not willing to use preferred pronouns. But I want to point out something. We don't use pronouns when we're talking to a person. I don't say to you, Allison, hey, her. Hey, she. I say, hey, Allison. I use your name if I'm talking to you. We only use pronouns when we're referring to someone in the third person. And so what the requirement is in the culture is that we go along with that person's self-ideation, even when we're talking to other people. And that just strikes me as a bit much. They have the liberty to live according to their own convictions, the real them, as it were. Why aren't we allowed to do the same? If our convictions are that we don't want to use preferred pronouns, why should we be forced to? It's inconsistent with our view. It's like telling us to be a hypocrite. And so, because names are conventions and people can choose them, and there's a practical element, you've got to use a name when you're talking to people. I don't care what people choose to call themselves. But when it comes to identification as a gender, genders are tied to their physical body, and when we call a he, a her, we are telling an untruth. And we are blurring heavily, blurring the distinction between men and women, male and female, which is another violation of the Christian worldview. That's what I...and also, you know, we're only using pronouns when we're talking to other people about the person. That's what I think we should stand our ground and use pronouns appropriate to the person's sex and let, you know, let the chips fly, you know? Let the chips fall, I guess is the right way to put it. You know, people don't like it, then they're not going to like it. Okay, what am I going to say? You know, here's a little dialogue that I wrote in Street Smarts that would be useful, I think, Allison, if you're trying to encounter. We're trying to protect people's feelings as much as possible, but that doesn't mean to radically compromise our own values here. So when somebody pushed back on this, like, we don't use the preferred pronouns, we say, let me ask you a question. Do you think people ought to live consistently with their deepest beliefs about who they think they understand themselves to be? Something along that line. Now, of course, the person I'm asking the question is going to say yes, because this is their defense for transgender ideation. Okay, all right, fine. Well, then, if that's what you believe, then why won't you let me live according to my deepest convictions about these things? That's another question. They've got to answer it. So, you know, I don't know how they're going to answer it. Well, because you're mean or you're rude or, I don't know what they're going to say. You're bigoted or whatever. Or it makes us feel bad. Well, I don't know why it would make you feel bad if I don't call you what you want to be called or refer to you as someone else. Don't you have the strength of your own convictions about this? I don't know. That's just some words that might be helpful to you to navigate here, but those are my ideas about those two things, preferred names and preferred pronouns. I'm interested to hear what you have to say about that, though. Yeah, that was definitely helpful, but I actually have a follow-up question to what you said about using it in the third person. So I was wondering, like, if there's, like, a trans individual who is, like, biologically a woman, but wants to use, like, he, him pronouns, when referring to, like, that in the third person, I wouldn't want to use, like, he, him because that goes against reality. So do you think it's okay in that sense to use their preferred name, or is it kind of, like, just, like, glossing over the issue by using their preferred name in, like, that situation? No, no, I would have no difficulty using their preferred name, but I would not refer to a male as a her or as a she. And if, let's just say you're talking with a group of people and that individual...you're talking to a different person, but that individual is there and you're talking about that individual, so you could just use their name. You could just say, you know, let's say it's a woman who's named herself Fred, just and instead of saying she referring to Fred standing there, you could just say Fred. And then you avoid that problem. And what that is, is your genuine attempt to be gracious and kind in that circumstance so you're not making the person feel uncomfortable unnecessarily. You're trying to find a way to adjust and be gracious without compromising your view. Makes sense? Yeah, thank you. Does that cover the bases? Yep. Allison, I'm really glad you called today. Yeah, thanks for answering. Anytime you want, okay? Yep. All righty, bye-bye now. Oh, that was great. We're gonna take a break, and then we'll have more open calls. Or if you'd like to call 855-243-9975, that single line is now open. Do you want to become a more knowledgeable Christian ambassador without sitting through a formal course on apologetics? Well, we've made that possible for you through our STR Quick Reference app. Available for free on iTunes and Google Play, the STR Quick Reference app holds a wealth of information summarizing what you need to know on a range of topics. Learn how to defend the faith, see how other worldviews compare to Christianity, and master the biblical view of morality all through short, engaging videos. Before you know it, you'll be well-versed on a number of important apologetics topics. In addition, the quick reference app also includes a Bible with text and audio, as well as some featured STR resources, all to enhance your learning experience. The STR Quick Reference app will equip you to engage in thoughtful conversation about the key issues of life from a classical Christian perspective. Visit iTunes or the Google Play Store today and download the STR Quick Reference app. And if you enjoy the app, make sure you give it a five-star review. Some transgender ideology advocates cite examples from other animal species as evidence that sex is on a spectrum for human beings. Find out why their reasoning is mistaken in the latest episode of my podcast, Thinking Out Loud with Alan Schleeman. Look for it on Spotify, iTunes, your favorite podcast app, or at the top of

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

to the homepage at str.org. Did you know Stand to Reason has a YouTube channel? We release a new video each Monday on the topics you care about. Through short, engaging videos, our speakers train you on tactics, offer apologetics tips, answer common theology questions, and address big issues in the world today. Join tens of thousands of other subscribers so you can stay up to date when we release a new video. Just go to YouTube.com and search STR Videos, all one word, and hit the subscribe button. That's STR Videos. Take advantage of this free resource to help you stay informed, encouraged, and equipped as you share your worldview with others. All right, we're gonna do some more open calls, or rather open mic calls here, and I'm just, we did Sharie just a few moments ago. Let's, Kenneth, Kenneth has a question about asking Jesus into your life. Okay, this is, I'm glad this question's coming up, and oh, it's very interesting. Okay, let's see, let's hear from Ken. Hello, Brother Greg, this is Kenneth Coleman from Bortum in Mississippi. I was just wondering, when I was born again, I went forward several times and was asking the Lord to come into my life and to save me and to change me and to be with me, what you'd probably call the sinner's prayer. Well, so I hear people talking about, you know, it didn't save you, and I know there's nothing magic about it, but if we don't, like, ask Jesus into our life, what does that look like when we get saved? I mean, we're just walking along, sinning, sinning, sinning, and then all of a sudden the next day we just go to church and we're convicted of our sin all of a sudden, and then we just realize that we're saved. How does all that work? I love what y'all do, and I'm thankful for y'all. Oh, that's great. Talk to you later. Bye-bye. All right, that's sweet, Kenneth. Thank you for those kind words at the end. And also, this is an interesting question. I have talked about this, a broader issue before, about the way we use language to describe elements of our Christian life. It came up a little bit in an earlier question we talked about, there's no sin in heaven, or Garden of Eden was a perfect place, or other things that, like, God loves the sinner, but he hates the sin, or God can't have evil in his presence, or these are all ways of talking about things where we're using figures, I don't know if it's always a figure, sometimes it's a figure of speech, but it's the way that we put it. And because we're communicating with each other in community, we kind of get what people mean. Asking Jesus into your life is a standard way of characterizing how a person takes a step of faith to become a Christian. But it's just one way of putting it. How about this one, asking Jesus into your heart, oftentimes we'll characterize it that way when we're talking with children. Yeah, you can ask Jesus into your heart. Well, you know what, there's no verse in the Bible that says anything about asking Jesus into our life, and there's no verse that talks about asking Jesus into our heart. It doesn't use that language. It uses different language to describe this conversion. I'm trying to think of the best way to characterize it, because the conversion is a result of something. So there's these connected things where we believe and receive. We believe and receive the Holy Spirit of promise, having believed, received the Holy Spirit. That's Ephesians 1. So we see there's kind of a little sequence there, but they're kind of packed so closely together. It's the same event. Now there are different ways we might describe that believe, receive thing. And actually what's interesting in that characterization there in Ephesians 1, having believed, you received. So the action of the Christian was belief, and the consequence was receiving something, something that was given to them, the Holy Spirit. It isn't like they are asking to receive and they get received. That's not what the verse is saying. But I don't want to strain at that too much, because there are lots of different ways that the Scripture describes. If you confess with your mouth Jesus as Lord and believe in your heart God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. That's Romans 10. You can go to what Romans, make that John chapter 1. As many as received him, to them he gave the right to become children of God, even to those who believe on his name. So now you've got two things there, receiving Jesus and believing on Jesus. What's the difference? There is no difference. What you have is a core act of trust, a core act of faith, of a core act of trusting, which can be characterized in lots of different ways. So what you're talking about there, Kenneth, in your own situation, you know, you've been to church many times, and you've gone forward several times. That concerns me, actually. I'm glad you're staying with it, but why the second or third or fourth time, not just the first? What was going forward indicating? Now, by the way, going forward could be a stand-in for receiving. It could be for confessing. It could be for believing. I mean, they're all the same thing. It's an act of an expression of trust. Unless, in this case, somebody told you that going forward was what did it. Just come forward. You come forward and ask Jesus into your life. And I know you said there's nothing magical about that, and I get your point. But sometimes people get it in their head that there's some activity they do that gets them saved, physical activity, and not what that physical activity represents. So let me just cut to the chase here. You become a Christian when you put your trust in Jesus. You become a Christian. You get regenerated. You receive the Holy Spirit. You get your sins forgiven when you put your trust in Jesus. Now, there are lots of different ways that this is described in the text, different phrases, receiving Jesus, believing Jesus. We might say in our culture, coming forward, asking Jesus into your life, receiving Jesus as Lord and Savior. That phrase is not anywhere in Scripture either, but the concepts are there. Putting your confidence in Christ, your trust in him to rescue you, save you, and now you're following him the rest of your life. That's kind of caught up in those words. But the words aren't so critical. There are lots of people who did almost exactly what you described. They weren't Christians. They're walking along and they're thinking about it, and then they are Christians. C.S. Lewis had that. When you look at the detail of his day of conversion, he is going to the zoo with his brother Warnie. He's in the sidecar of a motorcycle. I mean, that's a little cabby thing attached to a motorcycle. One person sits in there and the other one drives the motorcycle. He's going to the zoo. I don't know if it's a Sunday afternoon or what. They said, when I left for the zoo, I was not a Christian. When I arrived at the zoo, I was a Christian. Now, did he receive Jesus? No. Did he come forward? No. Did he accept Christ as Lord and Savior? No, that's probably not what happened in so many words. But indeed, what did happen was a conviction and a trusting. It's the best word I can use because the Greek word translated faith is pisteo. What it means is act of trust. How conscious that is at those moments, I don't know. He reflects on it, Lewis does, as if it was one way when he left and it was one way when he got there. And somewhere in between, something happened. Now, he was involved in that, obviously. And he'd been thinking about this for a long, long time, very thoroughly and talking about it as well. But notice that the act or the event of salvation was not associated with any of those kinds of forms that we often associate with salvation. It doesn't matter.

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

Because the core essential was there. Belief, trust. Look at Peter, Acts chapter 10. So he gets a vision that essentially instructs him to go to see Cornelius, a Gentile. The Gentile, or rather Cornelius, has a vision that instructs him to go call for this guy Peter. The consequence is that Peter comes and goes to his household and the household is filled with all these people who are going to receive a message from some guy that God has arranged. And Peter starts to speak. And as he's, after he opens up and greets everybody and he starts giving the gospel, talking, and it doesn't sound like the way we talk about it characteristically, nevertheless, he was communicating the truth to them, what they needed to know. It's instructional, educational to read that speech, that talk, that sharing, that Acts 10, to see exactly what he does say and how he says it. But in any event, in the process of talking about Jesus and salvation, and judgment, by the way, all of a sudden, people in the group start manifesting evidences of the Holy Spirit in them. And Peter is shocked, and so are the people who came with Peter. His conclusion is they have received the Holy Spirit just as we have. What did they do? Did they receive Jesus? Did they ask Jesus into their heart or into their life? Did they, what, pray? Did he come forward? No, none of that. But the core thing that is manifest in different modalities that we talk about, and even in scripture, the core thing, that trust, belief, affirming for oneself in some sense, that was happening there. So, I guess I can say, Kenneth, it does, yeah, sometimes you just walking along and everything begins to come together. I can remember even for myself, 1973, the summer of 1973, I was 23 years old. I was thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking about these things. And I was estranged from my high school sweetheart of five years at that point. And I realized that I was thinking more about Jesus than I was about her. She was the reason I came to Southern California and to patch things up or whatever. But now I'm thinking more about, now I knew something was going on. And all I can say in the way I usually characterize it is that I just came to the realization that this was true. Just more and more, it's dawning on me, this is, this is it. This is the real deal. Now in September 28th, 1973, I did pray a prayer with my brother Mark because that was kind of the form of the Jesus movement. Nevertheless, I think I was already a Christian when I prayed that prayer, when I received Christ, if you will. So I have a spiritual birthday, I think. But my suspicion is I was regenerated prior to that, which is why I prayed that prayer and I addressed that issue with my brother. And I said, you know, I've already decided to become a Christian, is what I remember telling him. So I hope that helps, Ken. This is an issue where I think we get wound up in words, in the way, in cultural ways of expressing things like salvation things. And in different, you're from the south, they talk that way down there. They don't talk that way as much here, but we have our own ways of putting the same thing. So never mind about the wording. That's not so critical. It's not even, you know, about saying something or even praying a prayer. It's about trusting and believing. I don't think when Saul of Tarsus got converted, I don't think he prayed a prayer. I don't know why I would think that. He just knew that as Jesus told him, I am Jesus whom you are persecuting. And boy, that shook his world, didn't it? So most people don't become Christians by making a decision like that. You know how I know this? They don't by praying with somebody to receive Christ as Lord and savior or by coming forward, you know, or asking Jesus into their heart. I know this because I take a poll every time I teach on tactics. And in the audience, I ask people to raise their hand if one, they're Christian and two, they did not become a Christian by walking forward or praying with someone to receive Christ as Lord and Savior kind of thing. 70% is my average. Raise their hand. 70, seven, zero. The vast, sometimes it's almost a hundred. In other words, nobody came to Christ that way, but they became Christians. They were transformed by the Holy Spirit in some kind of deep ineffable way that was real, but not like the cultural form that some people use legitimately to express their faith in Christ. All right, let's take a quick break and then we'll come back to Maggie in British Columbia, Canada. All right, back in a moment. Hey friends, would you like to be encouraged throughout your week with timely relevant content meant to bolster your knowledge, wisdom, and character? Or maybe you have a desire to be connected with other like-minded Christians from around the world. If so, then you need to follow Stand to Reason on social media. You can find us on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube. Not only will you be able to interact with other Stand to Reason followers, but you'll also stay up to date and informed on our latest resources and events. In our current culture, it's important to have something of value to break up your social media feed. So just visit str.org and find the links to all of our social media platforms at the bottom of the homepage. Are you looking for a community where you can grow in your understanding of Christianity and learn how to defend your faith? Consider joining an STR Outpost. STR Outposts are groups of believers within a local church dedicated to exploring answers to the hard questions about Christianity. Each outpost is led by a trained director who uses STR's content and curriculum to equip members with the tools they need to think clearly and engage confidently with their faith. With around 160 outposts across 38 states and in eight other countries and growing, you're likely to find one near you. Joining an outpost is a great way to connect with others, deepen your knowledge, and be better equipped to make an impact in your community for Christ. To find an outpost in your area, learn more, or to consider becoming an outpost director yourself, visit str.org slash outposts or email me, tripalman at outpost at str.org. All right, final segment here. And we got Maggie from Canada, British Columbia to be specific. Where in BC are you from, Maggie? Maggie? What happened? Oh, sorry, I had my phone on mute. Okay, there you go. So where in BC, Maggie? I'm from Kelowna, and that's about a four-hour drive into the interior from Vancouver. A four-hour drive from where? Say it again. Vancouver. Oh, okay. So when I was in Vancouver, I've been there a few times and the people I taught there once, and they said in Vancouver, we don't tan, we rust. Well, there's a lot of rain in Vancouver, but we're far enough into the interior that we're like semi-arid and we're like a vacation destination for everybody. Okay, well, that would be if you're straight north, isn't that in those wonderful mountains there, like Whistler? We're in the Okanagan. No, we're the other way, so we're east. Oh, I see. So are you on the plains? Not quite the plains. We've got mountains. We can ski one day and golf the next, like in the last couple of weeks. Yeah. You can golf the next. I'm not old enough to golf, so. Well, I don't like it, but someone could. I get the point. Okay, we ski and, you know, and surf, you know, so you blah, blah, blah. You're back and forth here in Southern Cal. Maggie, what's on your mind? I've just been playing. I might be getting wound up in words. You were talking to the other caller, but I've just been thinking about like loving God and loving Jesus and why I react to when people sort of refer to God as Daddy. And there's like this emotional connection that I don't have. And, like, I know we liken God to Father, like, we, you know, we use that analogy a lot, and if I think about my biological dad, whom I have a good relationship with, you know, there's like a connection. Like, I love him. I would, Daddy, like, like, I don't have that emotional piece. Mm-hmm. Even, even saying me, like, I love, like, what does that mean? You know, we sing it. I believe. Sure.

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

And save, it's like, yeah, so I'm just playing with that, and also like, you know, why do I react? Like, you know, sometimes it's almost like, you know, that, oh, come on, you know, daddy, God. Yeah, like that's a little bit much, right? I get it. Yeah, it's just like the rolly eyes emoji, like, come on, but not in a judgment way, like just trying to figure that out, what's wrong with me or not. I get it. I have the same feeling about daddy. Now, it turns out that in the New Testament, God is referred to as Abba, which is like the Hebrew way of saying daddy. So if you're with the Hebrew family, Jewish family, you might hear the word Abba from the children, because that's like dad or daddy, maybe daddy, maybe, you know, something like that. Okay, so, but I'm with you on the daddy part. I just think that's a little bit too coy, too familiar, too, it sounds almost trivial a little bit, though I think that some people, for some people, it expresses a real sweet intimacy, much like the word Abba might be for a Hebrew person or Hebrew speaker, okay? So I'm very sympathetic to what you've just shared, Maggie, and I want you to know that I, but I think identify is probably the right word here. I identify with you probably more than you realize, because, and I have talked about this over the years, but different, there are different, God made different personalities, and some people are very, very effusive and get emotional easily. Get emotional, is that right? Yeah, easily. They get that way, and then when they talk about God, they're just gushy, gushy, gooey all over the place. And I think, well, good for you, you know, that's wonderful, but that's not me. Now I can get emotional about certain things. I was talking to my wife about the Vietnam War just yesterday, and I got all choked up about it, because it just took me back 50 years. I'm not a veteran of battle, but I am an Army veteran from that period of time. And I can watch movies and I'll just lose it, you know, more than my wife. So I can, I'm in touch with emotional stuff, but that doesn't mean that everything about my life is equally, equally participate in emotionally. I'm not even know the right way to say it here, but so when it comes to my affective, emotional, if you will, relationship with God, this is something I've had to work at. I've had to develop over time. I think some of it has to do with my personality. I'm a type A personality. I'm very, very left brain. I'm into, well, you know, the stuff I'm into, the kind of organizing and all of that kind of stuff. But I certainly can be moved to tears. That's not like I don't do that. But it isn't like if I just, I can, I just can't wait to get on my knees before God and, and just pour my heart out and just have this connection, you know, with God. I've had to nurture that and that's been successful. I've improved a lot in nurturing, but it was something that I had to nurture. So let me tell you a turning point for me. And then also share a shortcoming. I listened to a series of tapes or talks, tapes by Tim Keller about, I think it was the Lord's Prayer or the fatherhood of God or something. Maybe it was the Lord's Prayer, but he talked about God as father. Now I didn't have, or let me back up. I had a very strained relationship with my dad when I became a teenager and an adult. It was hard. And my dad was a hard guy. And so that influenced, I think somewhat my, my relationship with my heavenly father. But when I listened to Tim talk about it, and I'm almost out of time here, so I'm going to try to make it tight for you. Tim, Tim Keller talked about it. I, it was really helpful. And now when I go to God, the father, it is very different for me. I feel like I have a certain kind of intimacy with him. Now it doesn't rescue me from pain and hardship and heartache and all that. It isn't like I just go to God and I find a place of refuge. I'm still working on that. But still, I, I feel intimate with the father because I pray to the father, like Jesus said. In fact, I feel so intimate with the father, by comparison, I don't feel intimate with Jesus. Isn't that strange? My sister, my older sister told me she prays that she would love Jesus more. And, and she said, by golly, when I was praying that, I started feeling more love for Jesus. Now I pray that, you know, following her cue, but I don't know that it's really changed much for me, but I'm so happy that I feel connected with the father. And I say to Jesus, I'm sorry, Lord, you know, I'll get to know you when I get to heaven, Jesus. But it's the best I can do. I can't just crank this stuff out. What I began to do is I did the things that created more intimacy. I tried to spend more time with God. Amy's very good about this, reflecting on the nature of God. I mean, I'm instructed by her all the time when she talks about it and hashtag STR ask and whatever. She seems to have really done well at that. It's just harder for me to think about the attributes of God and getting to know him. And that causes my heart to respond differently, but everybody's different. And Amy, would you say you're mostly left brain? Would you characterize yourself that way? Or are you kind of split left brain or right brain? Okay. Whichever the logical one. Oh, look at, see, if you were really left brain, you wouldn't forget that kind of thing. Yeah, it's the logical one. Yeah, that's the left brain. I'm right-handed, but I'm left brain like you. Right-handed, left brain. Okay, in any event. But she's really, if you don't mind me mentioning Amy, but obviously she's a public figure with Sandaresen. No, I was actually talking to Amy when I was saying that. But she's, she has nurtured this really in a sweet way and is obvious in her life. And she talks about it quite a bit on hashtag STRS. So this is what I would say. I get it. I'm with you, Maggie. Don't give up. Keep pursuing the father or Jesus. Take your pick, whichever one seems to be more effective to feel closer to and nurture that in prayer and praise and in asking God to work in your heart to create more of an emotional love for him. And I think that will make a big difference. I'm so glad you called Maggie and hope to hear from you again. Hope that was helpful. Greg Kokel here for Stand to Reason. Give them heaven, friends. Bye-bye.
