# Just Tell Them the Truth

- Publication date: 2026-03-11
- RSS GUID: `strweekly.podbean.com/59b977d8-f80c-300e-910a-00b17a543cfc`
- Source: openai
- ASR model: `gpt-4o-mini-transcribe`

## Transcript

### 00:00:00 - 00:10:00

All right, friends, Greg Kokel here on Stand to Reason, and that's the show and I'm the host. And thank you for being part of what we're doing. We're doing a whole lot more than this. I always say that part of what we're doing, but I never really clarify. Stand to Reason does so much more and many of you who listen know about that. One thing that I want to underscore that I don't mention enough, but it's in a little commercial clip that we play once in a while, and I know it's easy to tune commercials out, but I think the way I start it is, if you like this show, you're going to really love Hashtag STRAsk. And the reason that you're going to love that is if you like this show, you've got me, but in Hashtag STRAsk, you've got me and Amy Hall. And that changes everything, frankly. I love doing that show with her. I learn so much from her, even though she said, I agree with everything you said, oftentimes. And then she adds a whole bunch more and I think, oh my goodness, I'm the, I'm I'm getting schooled here. All right. But she's fabulous and we'd both love you to listen to both of the shows. That's just one more thing. That's only three times or two times about 25 minutes each. So on alternating days, we have not only this show an hour each, but we have a half, roughly a half hour of Amy and I on Hashtag STRAsk. So then a whole bunch of other things. Tim Barnett has got Red Pen Logic RPG. I'll just go to, if you've never heard of it, just take my word for it. Check it out. It's going to take you 15 minutes. No, it's going to take you about eight minutes to watch one episode and you'll be hooked. Just go to YouTube, type in Red Pen Logic and there you go. You can also go to our website at str.org and you find it at the bottom and all our links for all our social media, etc. But, and we have speakers that are going all over the country, sometimes outside of the country too. We have our realities, six of them a year that are selling out like crazy. In fact, Philly next weekend, this weekend and tomorrow night, I'm getting on a plane actually to head out to Philly on the red-eye. And that's been sold out for a month. And we've got LA coming up April 24th and 25th. It's not sold out. We've got a thousand tickets already sold five weeks in advance. First time we're going to be at Downey Chapel, Calvary Chapel Downey. And I mean, we're going to, we're going to have 2,500 to 3,000 by the time April 24th and 25th comes around. And all I'm doing is underscoring all kinds of things that we're doing at STR. All right. When I say this is, you know, thank you for being part of this and what we're doing, there's so much more and many of you are part of that. I'm glad, but I'm just laying it out. We've, I've talked a lot about outposts in the past. We've got 177 of these right now in 40 different states in 12 different countries. These are, these are kind of, I used to think of them when I first had this idea 30 years ago, like Mac user groups. You know, you get people of kindred spirit in the area of apologetics who like Stand to Reason and want to learn more about it or just want to learn how to thoughtfully, graciously, and intelligibly communicate their convictions. Well, they can get together in local groups in the local church, be led by a leader. We have a goal this year, by the way, of having a Stand to Reason outpost in every state of the union. Now I mentioned we have 40, but we're still missing some states. So I'm going to let you know what they are. Alaska, Connecticut, Hawaii. By the way, that's extremes, Alaska and Hawaii, right? The hot and the cold. We don't have people in those states with, with currently doing an outpost. Massachusetts. Well, that makes sense. There are Christians in Massachusetts. Mississippi, North Dakota, Rhode Island, Vermont, Wyoming. Really? North Dakota and Wyoming. I would think that that would be a prime stomping ground for believers. Anyway, those are the states who are missing. If you want to be an outpost director, if you're thinking about it, just go to our website, str.org and let me see the URL here. No more details. Well, somewhere on str.org, you will find something about outposts. And there's a whole description there. In fact, there's a map of all the outposts in the world, 177 of them now. And you can find if there's one within striking distance of you, or you can think about starting your own, especially if you're in Alaska, Connecticut, Hawaii, Kansas, Massachusetts, Mississippi, North Dakota, Rhode Island, Vermont, or Wyoming. Love to have you on board. Now, I mentioned just a few months ago about, about people learning how to engage challengers in the culture as good ambassadors for Christ, and being effective in doing so. And I mentioned ambassador because this is what our organization is all about. We are not just communicating information. We're glad to do that. We're glad for other organizations that do it as well. But we are trying to build a certain type of person. We call that person an ambassador from 2 Corinthians chapter 5 verse 20. Paul says there, we are ambassadors for Christ. As though God were speaking through us, we beg of you on behalf of Christ to be reconciled to God. So our whole approach is an approach of genial diplomacy. We want our engagements with other people to look more like diplomacy than D-Day. And the model, I mentioned ambassador model, that entails developing capabilities in three areas. Knowledge, got to know something. If you're going to be an ambassador, you've got to know whatever the sovereign wants to communicate. Wisdom, that is an ability to engage in a thoughtful, wise, maybe shrewd way and character. In other words, you do not want your character, the way you are as a human being, to undermine the message that your sovereign is sending you out to communicate. So at Stand to Reason, we characterize this as knowledge is an accurately informed mind. Wisdom is an artful method, and character is an attractive manner. Now we are, we have it as a goal, obviously, to build those kinds of people. And it's very satisfying to see more and more individuals that God is raising up, not old guys like me, but I mean a whole new generation of people that are taking up the charge, the challenge as ambassadors for Christ with those kinds of characteristics. Not just people who know a lot. It's easy to learn stuff and that's really important. But the way one engages, the manner in which he or she does that with maneuvering in conversation in a diplomatic way and being gracious and attractive in the process. That's absolutely critical. Paul says, Make that, well, Paul says in 2 Timothy, he says, The Lord's bondservant is not to be quarrelsome, but patient when wronged. Okay. Peter writes in the passage where he enjoins us to defend the faith, to defend the hope that's within us. He says, 2 Peter chapter 3, he says to do it with gentleness and reverence. So this is a big part of the package, the way we go about it. Now this is all a lead up to encourage you to watch the segment online of the Diary of a CEO, which I was a guest on in September with not only the host, Stephen Bartlett, but also two others, including, well, one we call Dr. K because I can't pronounce his last name. But that's what we called him on the show. And also Alex O'Connor, the atheist. I had five and a half hours, five and a quarter hours of film work that got winnowed down to three hours and 20, what, six minutes or whatever. And I have an opportunity to do my best in that environment. But recently, I think maybe just in the last couple days, another edition of DOAC, Diary of a CEO, is released and the guest was Wesley Huff. Now, if you've been paying attention for the last year at all in the area of kind of YouTube Christian apologetics, you can't miss Wes Huff because it was about a year ago that he was on.

### 00:10:00 - 00:20:00

Joe Rogan's show acquitted himself magnificently. He is very close to getting his PhD in disciplines that relate to ancient Near Eastern studies and ancient Near Eastern documents and classical culture and everything. That isn't the specific thing. Actually, he's majoring in spaces between letters. When I talked to him about the details of it, I said, well, you're studying nothing. But in his very refined analysis of ancient manuscripts and the spaces between letters that mean something, he has amassed an unbelievable amount of knowledge. He's really fun. And since Rogan, he's been everywhere making the case for Christ. And I mentioned the preliminary information about Ambassadors for Christ precisely because Wesley Huff is such a good example of an Ambassador for Christ, the kind of people we want all Christian witnesses to be like with the knowledge, and he's got that in spades, and also tactical wisdom. He maneuvers so well. But he's so gracious. Knowledge, wisdom, character. His manner is, he's unflappable. And some people are unflappable because they're so courageous that you're not going to scare them. Come on, give me what you got. I can deal with you. And they're unflappable in that sense, but that's not the unflappable manner that I'm talking about with Wes. Wes is just very calm, very relaxed, and answers what he can answer and what he can't answer. He just, I don't know, I don't deal with that. But he exemplifies something that Amy was just talking about this morning, and actually it's a principle that we got from Dennis Prager. And Dennis would say this over and over on his own show. He would say with people who disagreed with him, and there were many who called who did on a number of issues, some spiritual, some policy-wise, political, whatever, but he would say, look, let's just focus on clarity, not agreement. Clarity, not agreement. You know, when you take this approach, clarity, not agreement, you take a lot of the bad energy out of a conversation. So it isn't so much that you are trying to persuade someone. You're just trying to help both sides be very clear about what's at stake and what the different points of view happen to be so people with a clear take on them can compare them. I find that for myself in a lot of circumstances, I'm asking the question, what do you mean by that? Which is the very first tactical question for the game plan, the Columbo tactic. What do you mean by that? Or some variation. It's just to get clarity. There's too much ambiguity in certain aspects of this conversation, so let's be clear. And in just a little bit, I'm going to talk about some responses to the broadcast of DOAC that Wes Huff was a guest on for about two and a half hours or so. And what was so nice for him, and I'm happy for Wes, is that he didn't have any competition. There wasn't four people there. It was mano a mano, it was man-to-man. It was Wes and Stephen Bartlett. And Stephen has wide interests. He has a massive following. He's got, what, 12 million subscribers. And he has a wide variety of interests, but he has shown a real interest in ultimate issues recently, which is why what we talked about in September, whether life has meaning or not. And this, I actually don't know what the, I haven't seen this episode with Wes and Stephen on DOAC that just came out, but people are talking about it. I've seen little clips of it, and I'm going to play a clip of it in just a moment. But I have, I'm planning to listen to it on the way back. I just got on the way back to home. I got a two and a half hour drive or a two hour drive, whatever it is, on the way back from the office and the studio. And so I'll listen, but I've just caught portions of it. I first was alerted to it this morning. Amy's watched most of it. And I just, knowing Wes and what he's done on so many other venues with podcasters that, he's such a great example about how to, I'm trying to think of the best word here, it's not posturing because he's not positioning himself. I mean, that's happening in some sense, but that's not what I'm after. It's just the way he is. Just a nice guy who knows a bit and does his best to answer the questions clearly and is not rattled by the opposition and challenges. And whether or not his message is appealing. I mentioned this last week, I think. I said, the important thing about giving a response is not giving a satisfying response because a lot of the proper responses to challenges to Christianity are not going to be satisfying to people emotionally, usually. They don't like what they're going to hear. The important thing is not giving them a satisfying response, but giving them a sound response, a proper, clear, accurate, truthful response. So we're going to play a clip here from the show with Wes Huff and Stephen Bartlett, just about a minute long here. And you'll hear Stephen Bartlett start out with a common question slash challenge that is offered to Christians in light of the Christian claim, which is Jesus' claim about being the only way of salvation. So let's hear what Stephen Bartlett has to say and listen how Wes Huff responds. If I don't believe in Jesus, I don't believe in the Bible, but I live a good life and I don't believe in God, am I going to hell or heaven as it relates to the Scriptures? If you're living your life rejecting God, God is not going to force you into his presence. So I'm not going to go into heaven then? No. Where am I going? Well, you would go to hell. Outer darkness where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Yes. This is not a place I want to go. No. Stephen Bartlett, I desire you to have a personal relationship with your creator because I don't want you to experience whatever hell is. The urgency of the Christian message is the bad news is really bad, and that's what makes the good news so good. Jesus has taken on that hell on your behalf. So there's a couple of things I want to draw your attention to about that short interaction. And like I said, I think the interview is over two hours long, so there's a lot there to ponder. And like I said, I hadn't seen it yet, but if this was like any other session that Wes has had over the last year, and he's had a lot of them in light of the launch that he had with the Rogan experience, then I think you're going to see a very deft characterization of the truth of the gospel in the face of someone who's asking honest questions. Now, what's nice about DOAC is characteristically, it's not a combative environment. I'm chuckling because it was a little bit combative when I was on, not coming from me, but Alex O'Connor was really trying to hold my feet to the fire on a number of issues. And so that was more challenging, but characteristically, it's more having a discussion and this is the way this was. Here's what I want you to notice, among other things, about Wes. Wes told the truth. Wes just simply told the truth. He wasn't trying to sanitize it at all. It wasn't a but, but, but, you know, kind of thing, this and that. He just said, so where am I going to go? Well, you're going to hell. Outer darkness where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Yes. Now, he offered a qualification, and I'm going to suggest a way that you might want to position yourself if you get asked that question in the future. But I thought Wes was wonderful in that he wasn't being apologetic at all. He wasn't sanitizing, trying to soften it at all. He was telling the truth. Think of a doctor who looks carefully at a patient and sees the disease ravaging his body, and the doctor says, if you don't get help today...

### 00:20:00 - 00:30:00

you will be dead in a month. Full stop, long pause, sink in. When you're dealing with information of that kind of gravity, you don't mess around, you don't mince words. You just tell them the truth. That's exactly what Wes did. And you could tell by the kind of pregnant pause, ouch, this is not a place I want to go, Stephen says. I get that. And Wes obviously didn't want Stephen to go there either. And that's what that segment ended with, OK. But I want to look at the opening line, though, and I'll just repeat it here, because a lot of times when these kinds of issues come up in conversations with other people, people just get it wrong. That is, they don't understand how it fits together. And notice how Stephen started his question, if I don't believe in Jesus and I don't believe in the Bible, but I live a good life and I don't believe in God, am I going to hell or heaven as it relates to the Scriptures? Now, there's a lot there, but I think a lot of people would just say an unqualified yes. And this is where Wes talked about if you're living your life rejecting God, there's going to be consequences, OK. But I want to look at some of these words here and the phraseology, all right? He says, but I live a good life. That's part of it, right? Well, lookit, if you are living a genuinely good life, if you are actually good, then you don't need a Savior. Jesus said, I came to call sinners to repentance, not to save the healthy, but the sick, OK? So if you're not a sinner, then there's nothing to worry about. If you're not sick spiritually, you don't need a spiritual doctor, all right, if you live a good life. Now, it's a big if, right? When one of the spiritual leaders, or I should say religious leaders of Israel came to Jesus, he addressed Jesus as a good teacher. And Jesus stopped him right away. He says, why do you call me good? No one is good but God alone. Now, it's a very important concept here that is easy to miss because people want to, they consider themselves basically good. Well, I'm a good person. And by our standards, I spent some time with Stephen Bartlett for that show. I actually don't know him other than that acquaintance for five hours while the cameras are running in September. But I have no reason to think that he's some dastardly individual. He's probably as good and nice as the next person or the best of the next people. I have no concern about that. But that misses the point. No one is good but God alone. He might be as good as the next person. He might be better than me or you. But the question isn't, is the standard? People say, well, I'm no Hitler. Good. One was enough. But you're no Jesus of Nazareth either. And you're probably more like Hitler than you are like Jesus. So the reference game isn't me compared to others and I'm basically good in that. The reference is to the standard of perfection, which is always the standard when you're talking about law. You don't get to break some laws as long as you keep the others. You know, it's like 50-50. I kept more than I... that's not going to work. It isn't the way law works. Now, so that's if I live a good life, qualify that. And I don't believe in the Bible. It doesn't matter whether you believe in the Bible. It's not relevant to this question of salvation. I mean, there were lots of people who didn't believe in the Bible in the first century who became Christians and became part of God's family and under the forgiveness that God provides that knew nothing about the Bible. They were Gentiles. They didn't have the Old Testament. The New Testament wasn't written yet. This is not related to believing in the Bible. So you're not... no one is faulted because they didn't believe in the Bible, OK? So what I'm trying to do is clarify some of these pieces of this question and remove the stuff that's not relevant to the bigger issue. How about this one, if I don't believe in Jesus? Well, this is where a lot of Christians will call and make a goal line stand. But there's a clarification that needs to be made here because when you say I don't believe in Jesus, there's a lot of people who get... just miss the point. It is not believing that makes the difference. As if, well, if you only had the right beliefs, you believe in God, you believe in Jesus, you believe in the Bible, you have all these right beliefs, then you would qualify for going to heaven. That's not the way it works. You could believe the doctor is the best surgeon in the world, the best oncologist in the world, can really heal anybody he works on, and you're the guy with cancer. But if you believe that, it doesn't heal your cancer. You've got to put yourself in his hands to use his skill to rescue you from the thing that's killing you. And so when we say believe in Jesus, we're not just saying have this belief that. We're saying put your trust in. If I don't put my trust in Jesus to do something for me that I can't do for myself, then I'm going to be lost. And the answer to that is yes. But as it stands right now, if I don't believe in Jesus, am I going to hell?" The I don't believe in Jesus stuff is too ambiguous. It's too easy to misunderstand, and people misunderstand it all the time. So here's what my response, if I'm asked this question, I'm just going to suggest this to you because you're bound to be in a circumstance where you'll need to do this with someone if you're open about your convictions and people begin challenging them. Are you saying, and when I was on many years ago now on TV, national TV with Deepak Chopra, the number one New Age guru in the world at that time, had sold 20 million books, and he laid this same thing on me. It was as if, if I don't believe like you believe, then I'm going to hell. It almost sounded like you're willing me into hell because I disagree with you. Of course, this isn't the point. And this is why I think the medical metaphor is useful. You are dying. And guess what? You know it. Most people do. Guilt. They experience guilt. Why? Probably because they feel guilty because they are guilty. How about that? So there's an existential awareness of a problem that people have. Even when we were together there in September with Dr. Kay and Alex O'Connor and Stephen Bartlett, we were talking about meaning and purpose. I said, look, we wouldn't even be talking about this if deep down inside we didn't have a strong suspicion there was meaning and purpose in the world that we needed to discover. We wouldn't be yearning for what didn't exist. This is an appeal to C.S. Lewis' argument from desire. But in any event, the fact that we're talking about this is evidence that there is something to find. OK. So we're on this quest, right? And what I would do in making this response, and this is the way I give an altar call when I'm asked to do it. And I don't do a standard kind of, you know, believe Jesus as Lord and Savior, raise your hand. I see that hand. Come forward. Whatever. I just don't do any of that stuff. I don't think, what's the best way to put this? Obviously, God uses it. I'm not dissing it at all. But I think there's a better way to do it that avoids a lot of the language that people may not completely understand the significance of. So believing Jesus as Lord and Savior to a lot of people sounds like religious noise. Sorry. If you've been around church for a long time, you kind of get what that means. But I think there's a better way to do it. If I'm asked to do this, and this is what I did in the last season, our series of realities where I closed the sessions, I said, look, among other things, as I'm giving a challenge to the believers, I'm speaking to the non-believers. A lot of you people came here and maybe somebody dragged you here. Maybe you're a tire kicker. I don't know. But here's the deal. And this is what I suggest that if somebody asks you the kind of question that Stephen Bartlett

### 00:30:00 - 00:40:00

Asked Wes Hough, you can respond with this. You can say, a day is going to come when you will stand before God and give an account for your life. And the books will be opened and everything you have ever done wrong will be laid bare for everyone to see. And at that time one of two things is going to take place, either perfect justice or perfect mercy. Perfect justice is punishment for everything you've ever done wrong, and God misses nothing. And perfect mercy is forgiveness for everything you've ever done wrong, and God misses nothing. You already know you're guilty. And here's what I encourage you to do. Bow your head, beat your breast, and say, Lord, have mercy upon me, a sinner. Lord Jesus, forgive me, a sinner. And then get up and follow Jesus and never stop. So there's my receive Jesus as Savior and Lord because, and here's the calculus, you can add this in, and I say it all the time, either Jesus pays or you pay. Either Jesus pays or you pay. That's the calculus. And that's bad news, good news. The bad news, as Wes pointed out, is really bad, but the good news is really good because the bad news is so bad. And if we give the bad news the short shrift and aren't honest with people who are dying, then they have no real motivation to accept the truth and move forward. Now, what I offered you is not only a characterization of what a person is facing, but there was also the little altar call thing too, as it were. Here's what I suggest you do, beat your breast. And this is from the parable of Jesus and the tax gatherer and the Pharisee in the synagogue. You might remember that. And so I wouldn't necessarily go that step if I didn't think a person was in position, but I certainly would say that to Stephen Bartlett, either here it is, you're going to stand before God. There's the books are open. Now what? Perfect justice, perfect mercy. Either Jesus pays or you pay. Full stop. Now, the reason that this way of putting it, I think, is so helpful is because it helps us to see that what's at issue here is not just a state of belief, like you've got to get your beliefs right, but it's rather whether or not your crimes against God have a basis for God to forgive you for them. Jesus is the basis. And if he takes the punishment on your behalf, there is no punishment left for you. That's the calculus. Either Jesus pays or you pay. Now, with that in mind, I just want to read quickly some responses that Amy collected for me from the internet that were comments left on the page below the DOAC offering. Right, Amy? Oh, that particular clip. OK. So here's how some people responded. Let's see. Here's a person named Mandy. I don't know if it's a guy or a girl, but in any event, I'll just treat it like a fella. But in any event, he said, he's lamenting. If you go to hell while you live a good life, no cheating, no stealing, no lying, no raping, no killing, and your drive is to be a good person, but you're going to hell because you don't believe in God? Well, of course, that's not our message that you don't believe in God. That's the reason you're going to hell. Now, if you, as I said, if you lead a good life, which, by the way, goes way beyond no cheating, no stealing, no lying, no raping, no killing, there's a whole massive sea of sin that we're guilty of that don't fall into those categories. I mean, just think of the two greatest commandments. Love the Lord your God with your whole heart, mind, soul, and strength, and love your neighbor as yourself. Just tell you quite frankly, I've said it before, I've never fulfilled that first commandment for one instant in my entire life. And maybe once in a while I might fulfill the second commandment. Most of the time I'm pretty self-centered, like everybody else. So I'm not that good compared to the standard I'll be judged by. And it certainly isn't whether I believe in God or not. So this person, dear Mandy, you misunderstood. He continues, I see serial killers turning to God on death row after they tortured, raped, killed innocent people. Do they deserve to be ending up in heaven just because they stare death in the eye and try to redeem themselves just to prevent hell? Well, there's more misunderstanding here, Mandy. No, of course not. They don't deserve it. Nor does anyone. Grace is, how does one person put it, God's riches at Christ's expense. It's not earned. It's given. It's not deserved. What's deserved is justice. But God extends a mercy to the worst of the worst, as Paul characterizes it in his letter to Timothy, because he considered himself in that category. So it's clear that God will extend his mercy to those who aren't the worst of the worst. It's there for everybody. Mandy is making it sound like it's a flaw in God that God is merciful to whoever. Remember, Jesus said, he who forgives much loves much. Then Mandy goes on with doubts. We're created, I believe we are created by something bigger than us. I know there is a lot of evidence that a lot of what's in the Bible is at least close to the truth. My own morals, he writes, are most aligned with Christian beliefs. I often envy people that have no doubts about how you get rid of doubts. I don't feel anything in church. I've read the Bible. I've tried to reach out and feel a connection, but I feel like the door just stays closed every time I try to open it. There's more confusion. I'm very sympathetic to the honest characterization here, but you're missing a point. It isn't about feeling. Feelings follow things. It's not about feelings. It's about the truth of what's going on. I don't go to the doctor. The doctor said, I saw this MRI, the CAT scan. You've got a silent tumor in your brain and it's going to kill you in a month. I don't feel anything. Yeah, that's why they call it a silent tumor. The feeling doesn't, let me back up and say the feeling is not a sound indication of anything necessarily. It could give you a false positive. It could give you a false negative. You get a bad feeling for nothing. You could have a good feeling for something, bad. It's the assessment, whether it's accurate or not, that's the basic issue. And someone else says, this is the most arrogant post an act you'll see today. I'm curious, what's arrogant about it? I've seen Wes in enough situations that I have no reason at all to think of Wes's approach as arrogant. Now, he's confident. He knows a lot, but confidence and arrogance are two different things. But this is something that you'll face if you stand firm on your convictions. People are going to interpret that as arrogance when it may not be. Oh, look, are there arrogant Christians? Sure. But I don't think Wes is displaying arrogance here. And I think the criticism is based on his confidence. If you think you're right, you're arrogant. Let me tell you a secret. Everybody who believes anything thinks they're right about what they believe. They may not know they're right, but they think they are, which is why they believe what they believe. That's what it means to believe something. To believe is to hold that the thing you believe is so. It's true. You're right. No way out of that one. Quickly here, I can't imagine believing in a faith that offers eternal damnation. The word is misspelled. It says Dalmatian. And I can't believe in any faith that offers eternal Dalmatian either. Not really wild about those dogs and an eternal one, that's.

### 00:40:00 - 00:50:00

Over the top. Anyway, he means damnation. If you refuse conformity, that's... Once again, it's a, unfortunately, a total mischaracterization of what's going on. It isn't refuse conformity to our religion. Just asking the question, have you lived a morally pure life your entire life, or have you broken with morality? I won't even put God in it for the moment. If you've broken with morality, you're guilty, and guilty people deserve to be punished for the thing they're guilty of. And by the way, we're guilty for a lot, and most people know this. It's not about conforming. Here's one from a person named Zoe. Is that a female name? I think that's a female. That doesn't travel. Okay. Mandy travels, but not Zoe. You can disown a parent, but they will still love you and want what is best. God is this 100-fold, so why would God send his own beloved children to hell? Think about it. It makes no sense. He gave you free will to choose, not force, not bribe, no conditions. We will all go to heaven, says Zoe. By the way, if he gave us a free will to choose, then how is it that we all go to heaven? Is he just dragging us all into heaven even if we don't want that with him? I mean, there's an internal contradiction there, but Amy pointed that out to me when we first read this. But I just... I want to look at something else, though, and this is what I talked about last week. When people characterize our relationship with God solely in terms of father-child, and I made two points. That's not the only characterization that we see in Scripture of the kind of relationship God has with those who he made. There's also sovereign-subject. There's also master-servant. There's also potter-clay. These are all in there. And would a father do that to his child? No, but a sovereign would do that to a subject who is rebellious. And the other point that I made, please keep this in mind, is that the father-child relationship, and keep this in mind because Christians abet this confusion by the way they talk, the father-child relationship is not one that God has with every member of the human race. We are not all God's children. John chapter 1, verse 12, but as many as received Him, Jesus, to them he gave the right to become children of God, even to those who believe on his name. John writes in 1 John 3, the first verse, one of my favorites. I love the way it sounds in the New American Standard. See how great a love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be called the children of God, and such we are. It's only those who are in Christ who are in God's family. The rest, it is a sovereign-subject relationship, and the subjects are in rebellion against the sovereign, and the sovereign deals with the subjects as rebels. This is throughout the text. One last one. To begin with, I'm reading now from Roman. To begin with, Jesus, peace be upon him, is not the creator. Stop making him what he isn't. I'm pausing for a moment. I'm wondering why he would say that, because the testimony about Jesus, where we get any detail about Jesus, that would be Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, establishes him as the creator. Now, this doesn't mean they're right necessarily. I think they are, but the point I'm making is if you reject the testimony of those people as to who Jesus is, then where are you getting your information about who you think Jesus is? Before Abraham was, I am. All things came into being through him, and apart from him, nothing came into being that has come into being, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Lots of passages I could cite there. But I'll continue with the last line from Roman. Ruling, also ruling on if someone lives a good life is on God and is not for anyone to say. The creator knows what is in his heart. Well, you're right. That is on God entirely, and the creator knows what is in his heart, and this is the bad news, because the creator has weighed in through Jesus. Remember, whatever you think of Jesus, maybe you think he's not the creator. Okay, well, then you got to look at where you're getting your information. And here's what Jesus says in John 3. The light came into the world, and the men loved darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil. And then a little later in the same chapter, he says, he who believes in the Son has life, not because of this abstract belief, but because they're putting their trust in the one who gives life, just like trusting in a doctor. He who believes in the Son has life. He who does not believe, the wrath of God abides on him. That is Jesus. Peace be upon him. Speaking. All Christians are doing is passing on the information that Jesus has offered. You can reject it if you want. That's up to you. But don't act like this is a bunch of Christians making up a lot of judgmental things and we're laying on other people. We are Christians. We are followers of Jesus, so we're gonna say what Jesus said. And that's what I see in this so far and the bit that I know about in this interview with Westhoff and Stephen Bartlett on Doak just recently. Check it out yourself. But I guess I'll close with this thought. And Amy said one of the reasons that an interview like this is so important for Christians to watch is there's a lot of Christians who are afraid to say what West said with clarity and grace. They're just afraid to say it. They don't want to, they don't want people to be mad at them. But when you are straight with people and tell them the truth, you know, it's amazing. A lot of times they're not going to get mad. Some of these people are responding kind of crazy, but Stephen Bartlett didn't get mad. He may not have agreed, but at least now he knows. Clarity, not agreement. That's what we're after. And incidentally, this is just the way that Jesus and the apostles spoke. They spoke frankly and without ambiguity. Okay, this has been a long session. Let's take a quick break. We've got some callers. We'll get to them when I return on Stand to Reason. Friends, if you like this broadcast, I know you'll love Hashtag STR Ask. It's our shorter 20-minute podcast where I am paired with the wonderful Amy Hall, and together we answer the questions you send us on Twitter. Hashtag STR Ask is released twice a week, Mondays and Thursdays, and it's only about 20 minutes long, so it's perfect to listen to on your morning jog or while driving around running errands or cleaning your garage or just plain loafing at home. Amy and I tackle your questions on theology and ethics and culture and lots more, offering our insight on the questions you're asking or the challenges you face. You can listen on Apple podcasts or wherever you download your own shows. Just remember, send us your questions on Twitter using the name of the podcast, Hashtag STR Ask. That's Hashtag STR Ask. Would you like a Stand to Reason speaker at your event? Greg, Alan, Tim, John, Megan, and I, Tripp, are available in person or online. Just email booking at str.org. Our team speaks on a wide range of topics, from issues in bioethics, gender, and science, to topics in apologetics, theology, and philosophy, and how to respond to other worldviews, all from a biblical perspective. Whether it's a conference, youth event, or Sunday service, we're here to give confidence for every Christian, clear thinking for every challenge, courage and grace for every encounter. All right, we've got about eight minutes left for this segment, and Caleb in Ohio has been waiting for a long time. So Caleb, you've got a great question. Let's chat. Caleb? Hello, Caleb. It's the sounds of silence. Are you on mute? Oh, Caleb, it's such a great question. Oh, there you go. All right, Caleb. Good to hear from you again. All right. I apologize in advance if I'm a little slow. I was a little tired today because I got up really to talk to some Mormons, but then the Mormons ghosted me. And so I wasn't able to talk to them. Okay. All right, so give me your question quickly because I want to get right to it. I know we have just a short amount of time here, but it's a really good question. All right, so I have a friend who's into Greek mythology, like the books and plays and stuff that use the characters from Greek mythology. And that got me thinking, you know, 2,000 years ago, what we today call Greek mythology, was something that was taken just as seriously as Christianity is today. And, you know, I'm sure there was people who defended belief in the Greek gods, just like people defend Christianity. And I'm sure they were very effective at it. The only thing was that it died off. And so how do we know that Christianity in the distant future won't be the same way? I mean, Christianity has already seen a decline in the West, significantly anyway. Oh, well, yeah.

### 00:50:00 - 00:58:00

That needs to be qualified as a historical point. But what happens in the future, 200, 300, 500, 2,000 years from now, we don't know. Okay, but the question about what happened in the past and the way it was understood then and the way we understand it now, that's a valid point. Okay, but it's interesting the way you put it, that you said the mythology of the Greeks was taken just as seriously as Christianity is taken today. I'm sure that there were people who argued in favor of the truth of Greek mythology and were very effective at it. These are statements that I don't think you have any ability to verify. And so I'm not going to grant the truth of them. I have some other things to say about this, but I'm not, I'm not, it does seem to be the case that ancient, clearly, ancient pagan theology, whatever, religions, believed in the gods, in the existence of the gods that they worshipped. That's why they worshipped them. And by worshipping them, they felt they could get something out of it, whether it's good harvest or more children or whatever. So it's clear that they took it seriously, and you could draw that. As for having apologists that argued for all of the truth of Greek mythology, and there's all kinds of details of mythology, that needs to be taken or understood in terms of that genre. Now, it's ironic, Caleb, I just finished reading a book called The Myth Makers, and this is a book about C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien and their relationship. But the book really focused in a lot on the concept of myth, the genre of myth, and what myth was meant to do and how these guys were masters in that field and using that genre and understanding it and creating whole worlds. I mean, especially, well, both of them were involved in world making. So you have the Chronicles of Narnia, that's a separate world. You have The Lord of the Rings, that's a separate world that was created by these authors, all right? And they were very taken with the notion of myth. But I am not willing to grant, based on what I know now about how myth worked and how it was understood, that these were all taken in a strictly historical sense. Never mind that they believed these gods existed, but this involved mythology. The point of myth was to talk about something true, but not use, but use in an analogical way, talk about the truth. So you could have the so-called dying and rising gods of ancient Near Eastern myth, like Baal, for example, the god of the storms. You know, they quote-unquote die in the fall when everything goes fallow and dark, and then they rise again in the spring. So that's a myth about the cycling of the seasons and seasons to cycle, and people believed some things that were true about those gods, but it is not anything like the characterization that we get, particularly in the Gospels of Jesus of Nazareth, which turns out to be, and this is something that really, really influenced Lewis and pressed upon him by Tolkien and I'm trying to think of the other inkling guy that had the conversation about this, that this was unique regarding mythology because this is a myth that truly happened in history. This is the true myth. This was the life-transforming realization that Lewis had. And Lewis addressed this question about Jesus of Nazareth and the Gospels in light of the claims that this is just another mythology. And his point, Caleb, was, I know mythology. I know how myth works. I know what myth reads like. I'm an expert in the area of myth. And the Gospels aren't myth as a genre. They're history. They're ancient history, a totally different genre. Now I have no reason to think that a hundred years, a thousand years from now, that there's going to be a completely different perspective on it. There are people now who think the Gospels are, today, who think the Gospels are myth. But Lewis is just making the point, it's not that genre. It's a historical biography written in the way that biographies are written in those days, accounts of people's lives, and they can be assessed for their accuracy on those grounds. And when they're assessed on those grounds, they get very high marks. And even somebody like Bart Ehrman affirms that, that they get high marks. There are multiple sources on Jesus' life. They are early testimonies on Jesus. There's detail that you don't, that are characteristic of historical accounts written close to the life of Jesus in the place that Jesus lived. A great book I would recommend here, and I know I'm moving fast, but I'm just looking at the clock, a great book that I'd recommend is by Peter J. Williams. It's a smallish book. I've recommended it before. I think it's titled, Are the Gospels, Can We Trust the Gospels? Is that it? Yes, there it is. The reason I'm pausing is there's a bunch of books that have very similar titles. Can we trust the Gospels? And what P.J. does is he goes into all the details. Look at all of this stuff. Look at the names that are used. Look at the locations. Look at the way they characterize. Is it the Sea of Galilee? Is it the lake, Lake Gennesaret? Well, different people call the same body of water different things that were characteristic of the way people at that time referred to those bodies of water. Mediterranean Sea, Jordan River, towns, locations, peoples, names, all kinds of things. Each of these things, and he quantifies a tremendous number of things. All of these things from the internal evidence of the documents give us every reason to believe that what was being written there was history and not mythology. And I see no reason for the passage of hundreds of years from now, a thousand years, for anyone to think any differently than they do now. Some people already think it's myth because they don't like what they read. These kind of things don't happen in their mind. But if you examine the texts for their internal evidence as they are, they don't follow a myth genre. They follow a historical genre. Anyway, there you go. I'm sorry, rapid speed there on that, Caleb, but hope that's helpful, and I'm sure we'll talk again. Greg Kokel here for Stand to Reason. Give them heaven, friends. Bye-bye now.
